GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

I ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Central Archaeological Library 
NEW O E L H I 


s 












— 






















i ' 









SUOMALAISEN TIEDEAKATEMIAN TOIMITUKSIA 
ANNALES ACADEMIAE SCIENTTARUM FENNICAE 
SARJA - SER. B, NJDE - TOM . 240 


MEMOIRS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY 
AND MUSEUMS, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, VOL, 5 


Corpus of Indus Seals 
and Inscriptions 


2. Collections in Pakistan 


edited by ! 4 S 3 

SAYID GHULAM MUSTAFA SHAH and ASKO PARPOLA 


in collaboration with 

Ahmad Nabi Khan, M Rafique Mughal, F,A. Durrani, 
M.A. Halim, George F, Dates, Michael Jansen, M, Tosi, 
Walter A, Fairservis and Giorgio Stacui 


and w ith the assistance of 
Jyrki Lyytikka, SAL Ilyas, Arto Vuohelamen 
and Petteri Koskikallio 



HELSINKI 1991 

SUOMALAINEN TIEDEAKATEMIA 













Press filed for publication in tkej\$nales Academim SstsMiarwn Fennicae 
at the meeting of the Academy on September AW. J485 

Editor: Professor Pekka Suvanto 


Copyright © 1991 by 

by Academia Sdenttancn Fennica (for the volmre) 
and by the owners of the original objects (for the photographs) 


Published with the financial assistance of the Unesco 
on the recommendation of 

the International Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies 
and with grants of 

the Ministry of Education of the Government of Finland, 
the University of Helsinki, and 
the Academy of Finland 


ISSN 0066-2011 
ISBN 951 -0556-7 


Printed in Finland by Karisto Qy, Hameenlinna, 1991 
Photo repro masters by Offset-Kopio Oy, Helsinki 











CONTENTS 


III 


Contents 


Ai 

Nft.. 


MUaja 



A 




Foreword by Professor Sayid Gbulam Mustafa Shah 

Foreword by Dr Ahmad Nabi Khan .... 

Preface .......... 

Introduction...... „ 


.**. V 

... vi 

. vu 

XIV 


L Indus seals and inscriptions and the archaeological sites in Pakistan.**...,***. XTV 

2. Indus seals and the external contacts of the Indus Civilization ......XX 

3. The function and iconography of the Indus seals and tablets....***.*,.. yxi 

4. The enigma of the Indus script.....,*************.,.XXII 

5. Earlier documentation of the Indus seals and inscriptions.*,,*,**...XXII 

6. The purpose and scope of the Corpus . XXIII 

7. The documentation of the objects.**.*.... XXIV 

Original objects and their present-day impressions.*.,*****,*,,*,...„„**,„**___.XXIV 

Broken objects.**...*.,*****.*.********...,.**.*******..**.. XXIV 

Different sides of the objects and their specification...........XXV 

The scaling and printing of the photographs.*..... .XXV 

8. The criteria of arrangement and related conventions of the Corpus...*XXVt 

General considerations.***....,******* XXVI 

The 1st criterion: the owners of the objects; and the overall publication plan.. XXVI 


The 3rd criterion; the stratigraphy of the site of provenance ___* *„*.„XXV1I1 

The 4th* 5th and 6th criteria: the object type* form and material; 

and the symbols in the page captions ..*..*.„,***,,.*...,....,.***,*.. XXVIII 

The 7th criterion: the monographic motifs....... . ....*XXX 

The 8th* 9th and 10th criteria: the size, style, and state of preservation.,.*....XXXI 

9* On the material and production of the objects and on the colour photographs..**,„*,.,.XXXU 


Black-and-white photographs 


A. Sites with many seals or inscriptions / graffiti (in descending order of their total number) 


Mohenjo-daro (M-595, 621 to 1659) ... 

Harappa (H-266 to 275* 356** 383 to 1019). 

Rahman-dheri (Rhd-I to 270) ... 

Pirak (Pk-1 to 49) .**!,.*,**.*,*. 


*. 1-252 & 416 
......... 253-351 

352-378 & 416 
. 379-386 











































IV 


CONTENTS 


B. Sites with few seals or inscriptions / graffiti (in alphabetical order) 

AJIahdino (Nel Bazaar) (Ad-1 to II) .................................. 387-388 

Amri {AM to 8 ) ....... 389-390 

Bala-kot f&lk I to 6 ) ................... 391-392 

Gharo Bhiro (Nuhato) (Grb-l) ............ 392 

Gumla (G-l to 16) _________ 392-394 

Hissam-dheri (Hd-1 to 7) ............395 

Jhukar (Jk-3) ................ 396 

Kalako-deray (KM) ................... 396 

Kot-Diji (Kd-1 to 17) ......,......... 396^00 

Lewan-dheri (Dar Dariz) (LwiM) . 400 

Loebanr IK (L IIM) ........ 401 

Mehrgarh (Mr-1 to 18) . 401-405 

Naru-Waro-dharo (Nwd-I to 3) .. 406 

Nausharo (Ns-l to 10) . 407-409 

Nindowari-damb (Nd-1 to 3) ............... 409-410 

Periano-ghundai (Pg-1 to 2) ........... 410 

Sarai Khola (Skh -1 to 10) ........„....... 410-411 

Sibri-damb (Sb-1 to 3) ................................ 411-413 

Tarakai Qila (Trq -1 to 8 ) . 414 

Provenance unknown (?-] to 6 ) ......................... 415 

Addenda (M-858 and 1659; Rhd-270) .......... 416 

Colour photographs (1 to 36) .,.. 417-432 

Table l; The ieonographie criteria applied in arranging the unicorn' seals... 433 

Table 2\ Symbols of the form classes of Indus seals and tablets in this volume „.. 433 

Basic data for the objects illustrated . 434.447 

Corrigenda, ........... 447 

Map showing ihe discovery sites of the Indus seals and inscriptions 


.448 


































FOREWORD 


V 


Foreword 

Pakistan, situated at a crossroads of historical passages, has become the home of a wide variety of 
peoples coming from all over Asia and speaking diverse languages. This land of glaring contrasts - 
with its deserts, green pastures, and mountain heights - has been the battleground of great wars and 
an abode of great religions. It is a vast storehouse of antiquities, and an engrossing subject of 
archaeological research. This fascinating country occupies a prideful place in the history of human 
civilization. 

The great river Indus has played its own pan in shaping the destiny of the peoples who have 
lived along its banks. Geographers as well as historians have described its awe and majesty. From 
its sources in the mountains, this life line of Pakistan enters triumphantly into the Punjab and winds 
its way through the plains until it ends up in the vast Arabian Sea. The Indus has been a source of 
subsistance for Pakistan throughout the ages gone by. The volume of water at the peak of the 
monsoon season has both destroyed old habitations and created new areas of prosperity. Moenjo- 
daro is an ideal instance of cities that have appeared and disappeared with the vagaries of the Indus. 

There are so many sites of archaeological interest to explore in Pakistan. The North West 
Frontier - the province of the Khyber Pass, Swat, Hunza and Gilgit and a number of other areas of 
interest - proclaims the extent and influence of the Buddhist power, for which there is abundant 
archaeological evidence all over the country. The Punjab, ravaged by wars and troops marching 
back and forth, has Harappa. the splendid Mughal monuments of Lahore, and the relics of the 
Ismaili settlements in Multan. Sind is famous all over the world with sites like Mocnjo-daro, Amri, 
Kot Diji and Debal. Baluchistan has already produced marvellous results at sites like Mehrgarh, 
Quetta, Nal, Anjira. But much is still to be done; a study of Turbat, Khuzdar, or Chamman. for 
instance, might yield interesting results. All in all, the possibilities for archaeological research are 
enormous. What we present here in this modest volume is merely a glimpse of what has been 
discovered and salvaged so far. What remains underground can only be guessed. 

The marvellous archaeological finds in Pakistan till today make us realise how much more can 
be done and achieved, also in the fields of cultural anthropology and linguistics. We wish research 
had more funds and facilities to carry out such work of inestimable value. There is a tremendous 
scope for further study, exploration and discovery in Pakistan and thus for the enrichment of human 
knowledge. 

The increasing interest of the world community in old civilizations and history of cultures is 
reflected in the association of Unesco with the present volume. We hope that the present work, 
which collects a wealth of material until now widely scattered and even unknown, will stir new 
interest in experts and laymen alike. 

Islamabad, August 1989. 

SAYIDGHULAM MUSTAFA SHAH 

Federal Minister of Education 
Government of Pakistan. 













VI 


FOREWORD 


Foreword 

The romance of the Indus seals and so-called decipherment of the script engraved on them is now 
more than a century old. The 'credit' for the discovery of the seals goes to a British civil engineer 
who ruthlessly dug the archaeological site of Harappa for bricks to be used as railroad ballast. The 
inscription first published was 'read' in 1877 by Sir Alexander Cunningham who estimated the 
characters to be archaic Indian letters of an early age, not later than 500 or 400 B r C Since then 
both Harappa and Moenjodaro and, later, other sites of the Indus Civilization have yielded thou¬ 
sands of such seals, and a number of archaeologists and cpigraphists like i.F. Fleet, C.J. Gadd, 
John Marshall. L.A, Waddell, C. Autran, 5. Langdon, G.R. Hunter, Pran Nath, Sidney Smith, P. 
Meriggi, Swarm Sankarananda, B.M. Barna, Father Heras, Abu Jalal Nadvi, A.H. Dani, SX Ray, 
A.RX Zide, Walter A, Fairservis, John Newberry and many others have worked on them to deci¬ 
pher the script However, their constant efforts have not met with a recognized success. In effect, 
every new attempt has either contradicted the previous effort or further complicated iL 

After the invention of computer and its utilization to solve other auxiliary problems, some 
specialists have tried to use the device for reading the Indus script. The first attempt of this kind 
was made by Russian experts of the Institute of Ethnology in the Academy of Sciences (USSR) in 
1964. The matter was also taken up by some Scandinavian scholars who likewise began their work 
tu 1964. Later on, similar work has been done by Iravatham Mahadevan in India. These attempts 
are yet to bear Fruits, However, it is important that the riddle is solved as it may throw light on 
many a hitherto unknown and unsolved question concerning this ancient civilization of Pakistan. 

It has long been felt that a compilation of a corpus of all the inscriptions on the seals and other 
scribbling* on a variety of related material is imperative to know the extent, nature and variety of 
their symbols. In the past, some attempts were made, but rather incomprehensivcly, The task has 
been taken up by the editors of the present work. The volume already published, in 1987. is con¬ 
cerned with the material now lying in India, while this volume deals with the collections housed in 
various museums in Pakistan. The task undertaken by Professor Sayid Ghulam Mustafa Shah and 
Professor Asko Parpola has indeed been tremendous. I am sure that the book will provide basic 
information to all those who are trying to solve the problem. 

Karachi, January I, 1990. 

AHMAD NAB1 KHAN 

Director of Archaeology and Museums, 

Government of Pakistan, 







PREFACE 


vn 


Preface 

We are happy to be able to bring out the present volume which contains 5417 black-and-white 
photographs and 36 colour photographs of altogether 2138 objects belonging to collections in 
Pakistan. More than 500 of these objects are published in this way for the first time here. 

This is the second of the three volumes planned, for the time being, to complete the photo¬ 
graphic Corpus of Indus Seals and Inscriptions. The Corpus will document the literary and 
sphragistk remains of the Indus Civilization, which flourished in Pakistan and Western India in the 
second half of the third millennium B.C. Related objects representing both earlier and slightly later 
cultural phases in the same area are also included. The Corpus will provide a basic tool for research 
on the enigmatic Indus script and language, on religion in early South Asia, and on the adminis¬ 
trative organization and external cultural contacts of the Harappans. 

The publication of such a work in international collaboration was proposed by one of us to the 
29th International Congress of Orientalists meeting in Paris in 1973. The proposal was accepted in a 
unanimous resolution. After the Archaeological Survey of India (AS1) and the Department of 
Archaeology and Museums, Government of Pakistan (DAMGP) had agreed to collaborate with the 
University of Helsinki in bringing out the Corpus, after the Finnish Academy of Sciences and 
Letters had agreed to publish it In its Annates* and after distinguished experts from many countries 
had supported the scheme, an application for financial assistance was submitted to the International 
Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies (CIFSH) through the International Union of 
Oriental and Asian Studies, The General Assembly of UNESCO meeting at Nairobi in 1976 agreed 
to support the Corpus as a scholarly project of a confirmed international character and of major 
importance. 

With the financial assistance of UNESCO, granted through the CIPSH in 1978-80, it was 
possible to start preparing new photographs of the Indus seals and inscriptions for the Corpus and 
to reproduce old ones. In Pakistan, the work was initially co-ordinated by the then Director General 
of the DAMGP, Mr M. Ishtiaq Khan, and directed by Dr M. Raflque Mughal, then Director of the 
Excavations Branch, DAMGP. Altogether 1341 objecls, belonging to the collections of the National 
Museum in Karachi, the Moenjo-daro Museum, the Harappa Museum and the Lahore Museum, 
were photographed by Mr S. M. Ilyas, a senior photographer of the DAMGP. The actual number of 
photographs taken was much larger, however, because each side of every object was to be 
documented. Moreover, an impression of most of the objects was taken in plasticine for photo¬ 
graphy. This work was discontinued in 1980. when Dr Mughal left for Bahrain to spend the 
following two years there in archaeological research. Prints of the objects numbered 1-350 were 
received in Helsinki in 1980, and those of nos. 351-1341 in the beginning of 1982. A list of 
photographs to be retaken as well as of objects yet to be photographed was sent to Dr Mughal in 
the summer of 1983. 

In September-October 1983, Professor Asko Parpola participated in the International Com 
fercnce on Karakorum Culture, organized by Professor Ahmad Hasan Dam in Gilgit. He wanted to 
check if any Indus inscriptions were to be found among the petroglyphs newly discovered in large 
quantities by the joint German-Pakistani research team led by Professor Karl Jcitmar and Professor 
Dani. While this inquiry regrettably yielded negative results, the conference gave Dr Parpola an 
opportunity to discuss the C1S1 project with Dr M. Ishtiaq Khan and with Dr M, Raflque Mughal, 
both of whom participared in the conference. After his return from Bahrain, Dr Mughal had been 
appointed Director of the Northern Circle of the DAMGP based in Lahore. Dr Parpola proposed to 
send a Finnish photographer to complete the remaining documentation. Dr Mughal insisted on the 
follow-up of photography of the Indus seals and inscriptions in Pakistan by the DAMGP. Mr S.M. 







VIII 


PREFACE 


Ilyas, the photographer of the DAMGP who had been employed in the work, was also present in 
Gilgit and expressed his willingness to cany out this task. Dr Mughal was afraid, however, that the 
DAMGP might not have the necessary funds for the work. Therefore, in February 1984, Dr Parpola 
sent to the DAMGP a sum granted by the University of Helsinki for this purpose. 

During the years 1983-1987, the Corpus project of the University of Helsinki concentrated on 
publishing the relevant material in Indian collections. As the work in Pakistan was still unfinished in 
1986, new negotiations were opened with the then Director General of the DAMGP, Dr Khurshid 
Hasan. The Corpus project wanted to document all objects not only by means of photography but 
also by taking impressions of them in silicone rubber, which yields reproductions of a very high 
quality. Concerned with the preservation of the fragile objects. Dr Hasan could not allow any more 
impressions to be taken, but he granted the University of Helsinki permission to document the 
objects photographically. 

As can be seen from the photographs of the fresh impressions published in this volume, all of 
which have been taken by Mr Ilyas, the quality of Mr Ilyas's photography is excellent on the 
whole. Only his photographs taken in the Harappa Museum and the Lahore Museum give rise to 
serious dissatisfaction. Yet Dr Parpola proposed that in addition to the objects of these particular 
museums and objects or sides of objects not photographed at all, the Finnish photographer should 
cover all other collections as well. The main reason for this was the consideration that the possibility 
of a choice between two distinct sets of photographs of each object would guarantee a higher and 
more even quality to the publication than the existence of a single set of photographs. It would also 
be more practical for the Finnish photographer to take new pictures of the entire material rather than 
first go through an elaborate process of identifying a large number of objects in order to make the 
required search for rephotography. Furthermore, a double set of negatives was to be taken for com¬ 
prehensive photo archives that were to be established for research purposes in both Pakistan and 
Finland after the model of the Indo-Finnish collaboration. 

In 1986-87, then. Mr Jyrki Lyytikka photographed 1378 Indus seals and inscriptions available 
in the National Museum of Pakistan and the Excavations Branch of the DAMGP in Karachi, the 
Moenjo-daro Museum, the Bahawalpur Museum and the Khairpur University, and the Department 
of Archaeology, University of Peshawar. Before the collections of the Lahore Museum, the Harappa 
Museum and the DAMGP Museum at the Old Fort of Lahore were photographed, however, Mr 
Lyytikka had to stop his work. According to Dr M. Rafique Mughal and the new Director General 
of the DAMGP, Dr Ahmad Nabi Khan, who had been appointed during Mr Lyytikka s expedition, 
the permission granted to the University of Helsinki did not email the rephotography of the entire 
material but only of objects that had not been photographed at all. They expressed concern for a 
possible improper financial exploitment of the national treasures of Pakistan sometime in the future 
if negatives of the Indus seals and inscriptions in the Pakistani collections were not in the control of 
the DAMGP. To dissolve this fear, the University of Helsinki was willing to renounce the copyright 
of the photographs outside the CISI volumes in favour of the owners of the original objects. All the 
same, Mr Lyytikka was not allowed to continue with the photography, but the DAMGP undertook 
to complete the remaining work by the end of 1987. 

The second volume of CISI was supposed to come out soon after the appearance of the first 
volume, as early as 1988. But as the situation with regard to the extensive collections of the 
Harappa and Lahore Museums and the missing material remained the same in 1988, it did not seem 
appropriate to publish this expensive book before every effort had been made to improve its quality. 
After new negations had been taken up with the Government of Pakistan in 1989, the Prime Minis¬ 
ter, Mrs. Benazir Bhutto, appointed the Federal Minister of Education, Professor Sayid Ghulam 
Mustafa Shah, to supervise the project in Pakistan and see it to a satisfactory completion. With the 
kind mediation of Dr Shahid Hosain, Secretary. Ministry of Culture, a formal agreement was drawn 
up between the DAMGP and the Department of Asian and African Studies, University of Helsinki. 
Already before this agreement was finalized and signed in December 1989, the University of Hel- 





PREFACE 


IX 


sinki could send Mr Arto Vuohelainen to finish the photographic work- His mission covered mainly 
the Excavations Branch in Karachi, the Harappa Museum, the Lahore Museum and the office of the 
DAMGP at the Old Fort of Lahore; some additional photography was done also at the National 
Museum of Pakistan in Karachi and the Moenjo-daro Museum. 

A detailed list of objects to be photographed by Mr Vuohelainen had been compiled by Pro¬ 
fessor Parpola, but unfortunately the DAMGP could not locate all of them at short notice. However, 
in the agreement the DAMGP has undertaken to collect and photograph all the still remaining objects 
for the CISI project (with duplicate negatives for the archives in Finland and Pakistan) so that they 
can be published in volume 3. We have a good guarantee for this being carried out with maximal 
expertise and effectiveness by the appointment of Dr M. Rafiquc Mughal as the responsible Paki¬ 
stani co-editor of volume 3; as a former long-time Director of the Excavations Branch, Dr Mughal is 
undoubtedly the best qualified person to search and find the missing material. We trust to be able to 
publish in volume 3 also some important objects from Harappa in colour, for the DAMGP has like¬ 
wise undertaken to provide the CISI archives at Helsinki University with a complete set of colour 
slides of all objects kept at Harappa. These could not be photographed by Mr Vuohelainen, as the 
agreement permitting this had not yet been signed during his expedition. The third volume will also 
include, we hope, objects that could not be published here on account of the rights of first publi¬ 
cation by the excavators, such as a considerable number of seals from Mehrgarh, as well as objects 
coming from fresh excavations, such as those going on at Harappa. 

One category of objects missing from this volume demands special mention. When the material 
housed at the Moenjo-daro Museum was being photographed by Mr S.M. Ilyas in 1978-80, Dr 
Mughal noted that as many as 171 objects which had previously belonged to this collection (and had 
been seen there by Dr Parpola in 1971) could no longer be found in the museum. However, some 
of them were later photographed at the Moenjo-daro Museum itself by Mr Lyytikka and Mr 
Vuohelainen (these are mainly unfinished and uninscribed seals). But most of these objects have 
disappeared without a trace. One hint to their possible fate is provided by an Indus seal auctioned 
by Christie’s Amsterdam on the 20th of November 1990. This seal has been officially excavated at 
Mohenjo-daro (its impression was published in Marshall 1931: III, pi. cxv, no. 549) and a museum 
number reading 55.35 is clearly inscribed on its back. The seal was not to be found in the Moenjo- 
daro Museum in 1971 or later, but all other Indus seals having a known location and a museum 
number that begins with 55 come from the Moenjo-daro Museum. Whether this particular seal. too. 
has once been there can be checked from the list of the 1955 accessions in the register of of the 
National Museum of Pakistan. The DAMGP has kindly provided the Corpus project of the Univer¬ 
sity of Helsinki with xerox copies of most of the relevant parts of museum accession registers in 
Pakistan (they arc needed for the detailed catalogue of CISI 3) but this particular register is not 
among them. Nor is the old register of the Moenjo-daro Museum accessible, for in 1980 it was re¬ 
placed with a new register that in no way mentions the missing objects. Another peculiar circum¬ 
stance is that the museum registration number of some objects kept at the Moenjo-daro Museum 
were changed in the 1970's. The present location of the seals discovered by Sir Mortimer Wheeler 
in his excavations at Mohenjo-daro in 1950 is a similar problem: only one of them is now available 
(M-977 here), being kept at the Moenjo-daro Museum (50.217 = MD 559); some years ago, another 
one was in a private collection in Monaco. The Government of Pakistan will undoubtedly institute a 
thorough investigation of this matter, and we expect to be able to report results in volume three. 

The printing of the many thousands of new photographs and their preparation for publication 
were time-consuming tasks that caused further delay in the appearance of this volume. After his 
return from Pakistan in 1987, Mr Lyytikka made enlarged prints of the new negatives which he had 
taken, concentrating on the inscribed sides. Supplementary printing of Mr LyytikkM’s negatives was 
done by Miss Merja Heinonen in 1988, by Mrs Maija YlS-Outinen in 1989-1990, and by Ms Erja 
Lahdenpcrii in 1991. Mrs Yla-Outinen and Ms Lahdenpera also printed the pictures taken by Mr 
Vuohelainen in 1989. The old photographs of the objects included in this volume have been repro- 




X 


PREFACE 


duced cither from the published excavation repons or from the largely unpublished prints in the 
Sind and Punjab scries of the photo archive of the Archaeological Survey of India. The latter were 
photographically copied by Ms Erja Lahdenperii in Delhi in 1985 and printed by Jyrki LyyiikM in 
1986, The photographs in the Sind and Punjab series were identified by Dr Parpola in 1975 and. 
from rime to time, later on. as well as by the research assistants of the CISI project* Mrs Virpi 
Hameen-Anttila (in 1986-87). and by Mr Petteri Koskikallio (m 1988-90). The photo archive of the 
University of Helsinki has been arranged and looked after by these same three persons. 

The photographs reproduced in this volume were selected, arranged and prepared for the press 
by Asko Parpola with the assistance of Petteri Koskikallio in 1988-1991. The layout of the photo¬ 
graphs was planned by Virpi H3mcen-Anmla (pp. 1-314) and by Asko Parpola (pp. 315-432) in 
1990-91* while the list of basic data for the objects illustrated was prepared by Petteri Koskikallio 
under the supervision of Asko Parpola, The preface was drafted during Minister Sayid Ghuiam 
Mustafa Shah s official visit to Helsinki in August 1989 and finalized by Asko Parpola in August 
1991. The preface and introduction as well as the the principles of selecting and presenting the 
photographs in this volume follow the pattern of the first volume of this Corpus. The map* table 1. 
as well as the symbols in the page captions and table 2 were planned by Asko Parpola and drawn 
by Mrs Hameen-Anttila. The introduction was written by Asko Parpola, 

As all users of the present book cannot be expected to consult volume one, it was deemed 
necessary to repeat most of its introduction here, though of course with appropriate omissions, 
changes and modifications. As already noted in volume one, the introduction pretends to be nothing 
but just an introduction. Its aim is to place the objects illustrated in their historical context, to him at 
the various aspects involved in their study* with select references to the existing literature* and to 
explain the principles and conventions of their publication in the Corpus. 


The publication of this volume would not have been possible without the generous help* sup¬ 
port and collaboration of the Governments of Pakistan and Finland and of many persons and insti¬ 
tutions to whom we extend our cordial thanks. 

The late Professor Jean Filliozat of the College de France. Vice-President of the Congress, took 
personal interest in passing the resolution in favour of the Corpus at the 29th International Congress 
of Orientalists. Professor Louis Bazin, Secretary General. International Union of Oriental and Asian 
Studies, and Professor Jean d Ormesson* Secretary General, International Council for Philosophy 
and Humanistic Studies, were most helpful in securing the UNESCO support and in administering the 
grant. We are much obliged also to Professor R,N. Dandekar of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute* Pune, the President of the International Union of Oriental and Asian Studies, for his 
personal interest and kind help, as well as to the numerous scholars (mentioned by name in volume 
one) who supported the scheme. 

We are deeply grateful to the former Prime Minister of Pakistan, Dr Benazir Bhutto who took 
great personal interest in the project and entrusted it to the care of Professor Sayid Ghuiam Mustafa 
Shah, then Federal Mimster of Education, Government of Pakistan, the Pakistani editor of the 
present volume. We also thank Dr K, Shahid Hosain, Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Tourism 
«HnrTp n i °f Pak ' S t^-' f T, all . hlS dficient administrutivc help. His Excellency, the former Ambas- 

m Fi„l A '\ T r R,az Hussain Khokhar ' and former Ambassador of Pakistan 

inland (and Later Ambassador of Pakistan to France). Minister Shahid M. Amin, have also 
kmdly promoted the project. nave aiso 

r ™, r 7 h the E “ d ,°5 1CeS and kind hd P Qf Mr Muhammad Ishtiaq Khan, former Director 
General, the project had the support of the DAMGP from the beeinnine After him the_■ , . 

been coordinated by the successive Director General, Dr Shaikh Khunthid Hasan (in mVand Dr 










PREFACE 


XI 


Ahmad Nabi Khan (since December 1986). Among the other officers of the DAMGP, we feel much 
obliged to Dr M. Rafique Mughal, formerly Director of Explorations and since 1983 Director of the 
Nonhem Circle, who spent a lot of time in supervising the photography of the objects by Mr S.M. 
Ilyas, Senior Photographer of the DAMGP, whom we also cordially thank for his patient and skilful 
labours. Dr Mughal kindly located many of the graffiti that were excavated by Sir Mortimer Wheeler 
at Harappa in 1946 and are now kept in the godowns of Dr Mughal's office in Lahore. Mr S. 
Hakim Ali Shah Bokhari, Assistant Director, also rendered valuable assistance. Dr Ahmad Nabi 
Khan and Dr M. Rafique Mughal have further permitted us to include the seal coming from their 
unpublished excavations carried out in 1973-75 at Jhukar. 

Our collaborator. Professor Farzand Ali Durrani, Head of the Department of Archaeology, 
Peshawar University, has put us under a very special debt by allowing us to publish here an 
extensive collection of potter’s marks from his excavations at Rahman-dheri. This material is of 
particular interest for the vexed problem concerning the origin and creation of the Indus script 
Professor Farid Khan of the same Department has also been most helpful. We further thank Mr 
Muhammad Nazim Khan and Mr Muhammad Daut Kamal, senior draughtsman, as well as Mr 
Hideaki Shudai and Mrs Fukiko Shudai, who all helped Jyriri Lyytikka in the sorting and cleaning 
of the potsherds at the University of Peshawar. 

At the National Museum of Pakistan, we have been afforded all possible help by the Director, 
Dr M. Abdul Halim. The Lahore Museum, the Bahawalpur Museum, and the Department of 
Archaeology, University of Khairpur (where wc thank especially Professor M. Mukhtiar Kazi) have 
also kindly made their material available and given valuable help. 

Good friends who have rendered much appreciated assistance and inspiration include Mr Sirajul 
Haque Memon (Karachi), who has long entertained an active interest in the Indus script and written 
a book on it in Sindhi, Professor Ahmad Hasan Dani (Islamabad), likewise an expert on the Indus 
script and the Grand Old Man of Pakistani archaeology, as well as Professor N.A. Baloch, former 
Vice Chancellor of the University of Sind. We pay our respects also to the memory of the late 
Justice Ferooz Nana (Karachi), who as early as 1971 kindly drew Dr Parpola's attention to Q.M. 
Moneer’s unpublished report on his excavations at Mohenjo-daro (1933-34), now in the process of 
publication by Dr Michael Jansen. Nana also indicated that there would be some private collections 
of Indus seals in Hyderabad. Sind, a clue yet to be followed up. 

The directors and members of the foreign archaeological missions to Pakistan have been most 
liberal and cooperative, and wc cordially thank them. The following have allowed us to include in 
the Corpus even their relevant unpublished Finds: Professor George F. Dales (Department of South 
and Southeast Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley), director of the excavations at 
Mohenjo-daro (1964*65), at Bala-kot (1973-76), and at Harappa (since 1986, still going on), and 
Professor Jonathan Mark Kcnoyer (University of Wisconsin, Madison), assistant director, exca¬ 
vations at Harappa (since 1987); Professor Walter A. Fairservis (Vassar College, Poughkeepsie), 
director of the excavations at Allahdino (1973-1976); Dr Michael Jansen (Forschungsprojckt 
Mohenjo-daro. Lehrstuhl fur Baugeschichte und Denkmalpflege. Rheinisch-Westpfalische Tech- 
nische Hochschule Aachen) and Professor Maurizio Tosi (Istituto Italiano per il Medio cd Estremo 
Oriente. Rome), directors of the Aachen-IsMEO expedition to Mohenjo-daro (1982-1988); Dr 
Massimo Vidale (IsMEO) and Dr Ute Franke-Vogt (Institut fur Vorderasiatische Altcrtumskunde, 
Freie University, Berlin), both of whom participated in the Aachen-IsMEO expeditions, have kindly 
sent us photographs and slides of seals and inscriptions, including one discovered personally by Dr 
Vidale; Professor Giorgio Stacul (University di Trieste), director of the excavations at Loebanr III 
and Kalako-deray. Dr Raymond Allchin (Faculty of Oriental Studies, University of Cambridge) and 
Dr Robert Knox (Department of Oriental Antiquities, British Museum), successive British directors 
of the joint Pakistani-British Mission to the Bannu Valley, have kindly provided us with photo¬ 
graphs of seals and seal impressions from Lewan-dheri and Taraqai Qila. 









XII 


PREFACE 


With the kind permission of Dr Jean-Fran^ois Jarrige, director of the French archaeological 
mission to the Indus. Dr Catherine Jarrige has kindly sent us excellent photographs of objects found 
at Nausharo (excavated since 1986) that have been published, or have been submitted for 
publication, in Pakistan Archaeology. Dr Paul Yule (formerly of the Kommission flir Allgcmeine 
und Vergleichende Archaologie des Dcutschen ArchSologischen Instituts, Bonn, and now in charge 
of the Corpus of Prehistoric Asian Metal Finds) has kindly supplied us with photos and information 
on copper and bronze objects (especially copper tablets) in the museums of Lahore, Mohenjo-daro 
and Karachi. 

Dr Michael Jansen and Dr Alexandra Ardcleanu-Jansen (Aachen) have further given us access 
to the unpublished original archaeological field books of the excavators of Mohenjo-daro, discovered 
by them in Pakistan. Dr Ute Franke-Vogt has sent us a copy of her unpublished doctoral thesis 
including lists of data relating to the seals and inscriptions from Mohenjo-daro and informed us 
about the results of her visits to various Pakistani museums. 

Passing from Pakistan to Finland, we should first like to thank the persons "in between". Mr 
Ahmed Jamil Ansan, Honorary Consul of Finland in Pakistan, Islamabad, has greatly obliged us by 
providing the project free airfreight service through the company he represents. Interglobe Com¬ 
merce Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd., Islamabad and Karachi. Kemira Oy has also generously sponsored us 
with free airfreight; in Kemira, we would like to thank specifically Mr Seppo Viitanen and his 
successor, Mr Seppo Turunen. Mr Ahmed Mahmud, Honorary Consul General of Finland, Karachi, 
has also been of great service. Mr Heikki Timonen. Managing Director of Machinery Oy, Helsinki, 
and Honorary Consul General of Pakistan in Finland, has over many years extended all possible 
help to the project, not least in taking care of the freight of the presentation copies of this volume to 
Pakistan. For their precious help, we are much indebted also to the Finnish Ministry of External 
Affairs, and specifically to Mr Tapani Brotherus, Ambassador of Finland to Pakistan (stationed in 
Teheran), as well as Mr Kimmo Pulkkinen. Charge d'Affaires at the Embassy of Finland in 
Islamabad since 1989. 


In Finland, the generous financial support of the Ministry of Education has been indispensable 
to the project. Our very special thanks go to the Director of International Affairs, Mr Kalcrvo 
Siikala. and to Counsellor Ritva Kaipio, both of whom have taken a great personal interest in the 
publication of the Corpus. 

Our grateful thanks for its generous support and encouragement go also to the University of 
Helsinki. The former Chancellor, Professor Nils Oker-Blom; the former Rector and present 
Chancellor, Academician Olli Lehto; the present Rector, Professor Paivib Tommila; the Vice Rector 
Professor Risto Ihamuotila; the former Dean of the Faculty of Humanities. Professor Ytjo Blom- 
stedt; and the present Dean. Professor Ano Mustajoki. have all done everything in their power to 
further the project. The University was the main sponsor of the project during the preparation of the 
first volume, and while the second volume was being prepared, it gave a research grant that covered 
most of the expenses caused by Mr Ano Vuohclainen's expedition. We would also like to mention 
Ms Marja Nikkannen of the University administration. Professor Heikki Palva, Professor Simo 
Parpola and Mr Harry Hal*, Lic.Ph.. of die Depanmen, of Asian and Afncan S«udi« and Mr 
Maun Laakso and other staff of the Depanment of Photography for all possible assistance Pro¬ 
fessor Rauno Ruuh.jarvi has again kindly allowed the Corpus project to use the photo laboratorv of 
the Department of Botany for several years. 

We cordially thank the Finnish Academy of Sciences and Letters and its office holders for 
kindly accepting the Corpus for publication and for procuring the major pan of the very 
co siderable printing expenses. In his capacity as the former editor of J Annates Academe 
Scientiarum Fenmcae. Senes B. we would like to mention here first of all Professor Yrin 

El; We 0 ha a vcrcce an d nd ' SPCnSable ^ "" ° bl,ging SUPP ° nCr ° f lhe «■* very 

beginning. We have received very warm support also from the former president of the Academy 











PREFACE 


XIII 


Professor Lauri Honko, and from the present editor of AASFB, Professor Pekka Suvanto, and 
from Dr Hannu Heikkila. 

The devoted and skilful assistance of the project assistants has been a most fundamental asset. 
We are gTeatly obliged to the photographers, Mr Jyrki Lyytikkii, Mr Arto Vuohelainen and Ms Eija 
LahdenperS, to the research assistants, Mr Pcttcri Koskikallio and Mrs Virpi Hameen-Anttila, as 
well as to the photographic laboranLs. Miss Meija Heinonen and Mrs Maija YlS-Outinen. 

We thank Dr Robert Whiting for kindly checking our English. 

The very high technical level of the photo repro masters prepared by Offsct-Kopio Oy is 
certainly difficult to surpass: if a photograph does not look perfect, the fault lies with the original. 
We particularly thank the sales director, Mr Kristen Sande, and Mr Pekka Keskinen who supervised 
the work, for pleasant collaboration. Our printers. Karisto Oy, have done an excellent job. 

Last but not least, our profound thanks go to the Academy of Finland for taking over the 
financial responsibility of the project at a crucial stage. 


We trust that the time, labour and money invested in the publication will have been worth while 
and that this book will promote research on the difficult but fascinating problems of the Indus 
Civilization. Finally, we appeal to private persons as well as to institutions owning Indus seals and 
inscriptions that may be unknown to us to make these objects available to research: kindly send 
photographs (together with other available data, such as measurements, museum numbers, pro¬ 
venance) to Professor Asko Parpola, Department of Asian and African Studies, University of 
Helsinki. Finland, for their inclusion in the third volume of this Corpus. 

Helsinki. August 1989 and August 1991. 


ASKO PARPOLA 


SAYID GHULAM MUSTAFA SHAH 










XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


Introduction 





1. Indus seals and inscriptions and the archaeological sites in Pakistan 


The first known example of the enigmatic Indus script was published in 1875, carved on a 
distinctive stamp seal from Harappa, the largest ruin mound of the Punjab. 1 In 1886 and 1912, it 
was followed by two more seals found at Harappa.2 But the full implication of these finds was 
not realized before excavations were started in 1920 at Harappa, and, by chance almost simul¬ 
taneously, in 1922, at Mohenjo-daro in Sind, some 600 km south in the Indus valley. More seals of 
the same type were immediately found at both of these sites, and it became evident that an entirely 
unknown Bronze Age civilization had come to light. 3 This led to large-scale excavations at 
Mohenjo-daro and Harappa 4 and more limited digs and explorations elsewhere. 5 The bulk of the 
Harappan or Indus seals and inscriptions available to research comes from these excavations in the 
1920's and 1930’s. 6 


In the partition of British India in 1947, all the major sites of the Indus civilization known at 
that time became pan of Pakistan, but the Harappan antiquities were divided between India and 
Pakistan. 7 Since then, mo re than 862 Early, Mature and Late Harappan sites have been discovered 

l(tf-IMTp7xXXn H )Sn in: A ' Ch<U0lO * iCal Survty * ,ndia - ***** for thg > ear l872 - 73 ‘ V °L V. Calcutta 1875, 

l M L° n « worth Dames. Old seals found at Harappa. The Indian Antiquary XV: 179. January 1886. 1; J.P. Reel, Seals 
from Harappa. Journal of the Royal Astatic Society 1912, 699-701. 

For . tompetoui,, hislory of Hsrsppin Indies. see Michiel I™, DU IndtuZivUUatiem: Entdechung etner frihen 
Hochhattur KOIn 198b. For the Indio ci.ili.Kion in gencril. for iu Cornell md fot the IMCSI de.elnpnicnls. ice ihenoiks 
««1 lhc following: Gregory L Possehl (ed). Ancient Cilier of the Indus. New Delhi 1979 id. 

TL ZTr* r 7.TiT l98J: A H led ) - Wew Perspectvet. IihunebKl mi-. B. 

, Lei and S p P. Gnpu (edi.L Franlter, of the Indus Cmhtation. New Delhi 1984: Vergessene Slddte am Indus Fruhe 

rn Th c“". lahrtausend. M.ine 1987; Let cud, oublide, de Undus Archeologic dtt Pakistan P„i, 

1988. and ihe series South Asian Archaeology, from 1971 onwards. 

John Merih.lt (ed ). Moh,n,o-daro tied the Indus Cmlitatian. Mn. London 1931; Emeu Micki. Further 
Excavations at Mohen,oDaro. Ml. New Delhi 1938; M S Vm. fteewlinw at Harappa. MI. New Delhi 1M0 A mod 
onporue,' enpplemenl lo .he exceviuon report. of Mohcnjo-D.ro end Hi.pp. m a* Phoio Album, of ,he Sind .ml Punjd, 
series tn die archives of the Director General. Archaeological Survey of India- th™ . 

■he, were uken of ihc is «, when dicy h- 

indispensable help „o„dcd by *. orignul field regolcr. of the un.o» „f Moh.njod.rt, redi^c^tfc Muh^ 
J«,sen. who has also started their publication: Michael Jansen and GUmher Urban (eds V Mohemodnr ^ ^ r ? 

University Mission 1979.1985. Section One Data Collection Vo, I cTallit T VI V 

Registers ,024-1938 Part One The HR-Area Field Register ,9^927 Ledf ^ c , V C ' ° f "" ^ 
follow Both the Photo archives and the Held ^IZJZ ci^ JZ tTll T ? ^ ^ " 

doctoral thesis. Die Glyptik aus Mohenjo-daro Mil. Berlin 1990 a useful and manv * dedI ^ Ute Fran * C ‘ Vo * 1 m hcr 
inscription, from Mohenjo-D.ro. “ d "'“S' *'** ««n.n«K,n of Ihe sell, .nd 

^ wpecially H. Hargreaves. Excavations in Baluchistan 1925 Mm , 

MAS., 35. C.kutu ,929; Sir Anrel Slem. An archl^Z Z'TZZsLl^l ^a <* 

Ctlcuiu .929; Sir Aurel Sttin. An archaeological tear „ c.edrosta. MASI 43 CeZ^miTc u i’^F T' 

W W ’ MASI Delhi 1934: Ernest Mackay. Chanhu daro Excavations '/9J5 36 ExpU>ratU>ns 

Haven 1934. novations. 1035-36. American Onenul Series 20. New 

6 Many Indus seals and inscriptions were excavated by the custodians of the l«--l , 

ofnei.1 excivinons hwi ^e„ Cosed 77,,. msieri.l wis not JS3". " , *“ "* 

Finds are made in the Annual Report of the Archarnly,,, -./ c 7 ? ™ Y ^ bn<cf d & encr *l references to the 

Cileum ,936. 7072; 7934.35. ' 93 ° 3 '- 1932 31 3 3933 3 < 

S9AI. Forgotten in the museums, most of these objects are published in phot " ^ 1936 37 ' C,lcuiu 194 °. 

Corpus 1 P“Wuhed m photographs for the First time In the present 

7 Most of the Indus seals and tablets in Indian collections arc well preserved -nd .h. 

while those in Pakistan are often broken and stereotype The latter howiL ^ TC * ticnl m3n V ^fetcni types. 

jv*- me laiier, nowever, are more numerous. 












INTRODUCTION 


XV 


in the Indian Union. 8 At the same time, archaeological exploration and excavation has continued 
to be carried out in Pakistan. 9 

The following is a brief alphabetical catalogue of prehistoric sites in Pakistan that are known to 
have produced seals, inscriptions or graffiti kept in Pakistani collections. For their location, see the 
map at the end of the book (p. 448); for the chronological terms Pre-, Early Mature, Late and Post- 
Harappan. see chapter 8. 

Allahdino (alias Nel Bazaar): This Mature Harappan village site near Karachi in Sind was ex¬ 
cavated by Professor Walter A. Fairscrvis in 1973-1977. 10 

Amri in southern Sind was discovered by N.G. Majumdar in 1929 and excavated by Dr Jean- 
Marie Casa! in 1959-1962. Periods: Pre- to Late Harappan. 11 

Bala-kot, situated near the coast in the Las Bela district of South Baluchistan, was excavated 
by Professor George F. Dales in 1973-76. There are two periods. A and B, Pre /Early Harappan 
(with numerous • potter’s marks”) and Mature Harappan (with Indus seals). 12 

Dumb Sadaat: The Pre- and Early Harappan layers of this site in the Quetta Valley in Central 
Baluchistan have yielded sherds with incised "potter’s marks". 13 

Gharo Bhiro (Nuhato) in Sind: One Mature Harappan seal coming from the surface of this site 
was discovered by Dr N.A. Baloch; it is reproduced in this volume from his report. 14 

Gumla: This Early and Mature Harappan site in the Gomal Valley, North-West Frontier 
Province, was discovered by Professor Ahmad Hasan Dani in 1967 and excavated by him in 1971. 
We reproduce one button seal and one potsherd with a painted design from the excavation report 13 
and several unpublished graffiti. 

Harappa: In 1946, Sir Mortimer Wheeler excavated at Harappa; 16 his finds including material 
relevant to CISI are kept at the office of the Northern Circle of the DAMGP in the Old Fort of 
Lahore. 17 No seals or inscriptions were found by Dr M. Rafiquc Mughal in his excavations at 
cemetery R 37 in 1966. 18 A number of new seals, tablets and graffiti come from the new exca¬ 
vations carried out since 1986 by the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of 
Wisconsin at Madison i n collaboration with the Department of Archaeology, Government of 

See references in CISI l. p. xi f. In recent yean, the site of Dholavira in Kutch has yielded both new Indus seals and 
other exciting finds, including a unique inscription of monumental size, with signs inlaid with crystalline rock. Cf. R.S. 
Biaht. Dholavira: New horizons of the Indus Civilization. Puratattva 20 (1990). 71-82; M.C. Joshi, Recent archaeological 
discoveries in India, in: Adalbert 1. Gail (ed.). South Asian Archaeology 1991. Berlin (forthcoming). 

9 Sec M. Rafiquc Mughal. Archaeological field research in Pakistan since independence: An overview. Bulletin of the 
Deccan College Post Graduate and Research Institute 49 (1990), 261-278; A H Dani. Recent archaeological discoveries in 
Pakistan. Paris and Tokyo 1988. 

10 See Walter A. Fairservis. Jr.. Excavations at the Harappan site of Allahdino. I: The seals and other inscribed material. 
Papers of the Allahdino expedition. New York 1976; III: The graffiti; A model in the decipherment of the Harappan script! 
Ibid. 3. New York 1977; id., Allahdino: An excavation of a small Harappan site, in: Gregory L. Possehl (ed.). Harappan 
Civilization A contemporary perspective. New Delhi 1982. 107-112. Only part of the seals and the numerous graffiti 
found here could be located for photography for this volume. 

11 See Jean-Mane Casal. Fouilles d'Amri Ml. Pans 1964. Orly part of the numerous graffiti and few seals found at Amri 
could be located for photography for this volume. 

12 Sec George F. Dales. Excavations at Baiakot. Pakistan. 1973. Journal of Field Archaeology 1 (1974), 3-22; id_ The 
Balakot project: Summary of four years excavations in Pakistan, in: Maurizio Taddei (ed.). South Asian Archaeology 1977. 
Naples 1979. I. 241-274. The graffiti of period A (28 are published in drawings by Dales 1974. 16 fig. 11) could not be 
located for photography, but we are happy to be able to illustrate in CISI the Mature Harappan seals from Bala-kot and the 
unique painted bangle, which has not been published so far. 

13 Cf. Walter A. Fairservis. Jr.. Excavations in the Quetta Valley. West Pakistan . Anthropological Papers of the Amer¬ 
ican Museum of Natural History 45.2. New York 1956. 328-335. 

14 N.A. Baloch. In search of the Indus culture sites in Sind. Bulletin of the Institute of Sindhology. University of Sind 3* 
2-3 (1973): 11-19. map. 6 pi. 

15 Ahmad Hasan Dani. Excavations in the Gomal Valley. Ancient Pakistan 5 (1970-71), pt. 40: 20 and pi. 83: 1. For 
critical assessment of the periodization of the Gumla sequence (Gumla II-III together = Early Harappan). see M. Rafiquc 
Mughal. The Early Harappan cultural phase: A reply. Puratattva 9, 1977-78 (1980). 84-88. 

Scc R E M. Wheeler. Harappa 1946: The defences and cemetery R 37. Ancient India 3 (1947). 58-130 and pL xv-lx. 

17 All of the relevant objects could not be located for photography for the present volume. 

18 Cf. Pakistan Archaeology 5 (1968), 63-68. 












XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


Pakistan, under the direction of Professors George F. Dales and J, Mark KenoyerJ? 

Hissam-dheri situated very close to Rahman-dhcri is a small site representing the Mature 
Harappan period. 20 

Jalilpur; This Early Harappan site in Central Punjab was excavated by Dr M. Rafique Mughal 
in 1971 and 1974. 21 

Jhukar is a Mature and Late Harappan site 25 km northwest of Mohenjo-daro in Sind. It has 
been excavated by ELD, Banerji in 1918, by KG, Majumdar in 1928 and by Dr Ahmad Nabi Khan 
and Dr M. Rafique Mughal in 1973-74J 22 

Kalaka-deray is a Post-Harappan site between Buner and Indus Kohistan, excavated by Pro¬ 
fessor Giorgio Stacul. The Fust protohistorical stamp seal so far discovered in the Swat Valley (our 
Kl-1> was found in 1989; its period (K1 Ell) corresponds to Ghalegay IV, c. 1700-1400 BXL 23 

Kile Gut Mohammad Period IV (c, 3600-2600 B.C.) of this site in the Quetta Valley of 
Central Baluchistan has yielded sherds with "potter’s marks". 24 

^ Kot-Diji is an Early and Mature Harappan site in Sind excavated by Dt F.A. Khan in 1957- 
58.^ All relevant material coming from Kot-Diji that has been published so far is illustrated in this 
volume, 26 and seven previously unpublished graffiti in addition. 

Lewan-dheri (alias Dar Dari*) in the Bannu District of the NWFP was excavated in 1977-78 
by the Cambridge-Peshawar Universities Joint Expedition under the direction of Dr F.R, Allchin 27 
The Early Harappan layers produced our Lwn-l, "a clay fragment (45 x 30 x 15 mm) with two 
impressions of one and the same seal on the obverse side and impressions of the string and malting 
or fabric cover on the rev erse ’ 28 

13 Soe Gaw S c F Preliminary report on fitit season ai jfarappa. 1986, Berkeley 19S6; George F. Dil» and J. Mirk 

Keciuyer. Preliminary report on the University of California as Berkeley s second season as liarappa. Pakistan, January 
April. 1987. Berkeley 19S7; id., Preliminary report on the third season (January March 1988} of research Harappa, 
Pakistan, Berkeley snd Madison Preliminary report on the fourth season (Juratory 15 March 31 1989) of research 
at Harappa, Pakistan, Berkeley ind Middon 19*9; kL Prelimnary report on the fifth season at Horans 



published one (ibid. fi e . 4.9.2 on page my For the 


kindi ^ * * & f.r. Ancbin th. , C z 

iainc reason We cannot publish photograph! of Circe painted bowls 









INTRODUCTION 


XVII 


Loehanr III ; This PoskHarappan sire representing the Ghalcghai IV period (c. 17004400 
B.CT is situated east of the town of Mingora in the Swat Valley and has been excavated by Pro¬ 
fessor Giorgio Sfacul in 1975-76 and 1979.2* 

Mehrgarh: This most important Pre- and Early Harappan site, situated at the foot of the Bolan 
pass to the highlands of Baluchistan in the Kachi Plain, was excavated by the French Archaeological 
Mission to the Indus under the direction of Dr Jean-Franfois Janige in 1974- L9S6. 30 Me hrgarh has 
for the first time provided an unbroken stratigraphic sequence from the 7th to the 3rd millennium 
B.C.. and the nearby sites of Nausharo, Sibri and Pirak extend this to the first millennium, with 
just a small gap in the early second millennium B r C, 31 

Mohenjo-daro: Limited excavations were carried out at the principal Mature Harappan site by 
Sir Mortimer Wheeler in I950 3 *. and by George F. Dales in 1964-65. 33 Between 1979 and 1986, 
the Mohenjo-daro Research Project of the Technical University of Aachen, directed by Dr Michael 
Jansen, has done much documentation work at Mohenjo-daro and collaborated on an extensive 
surface survey with a team of ihe Istituto Italiano per j] Medio ed Estremo Oriente led by Professor 
Mauri do Tosi, 34 

Naru Warp-dharo; This Mature Harappan site in Sind was reported to have produced "pot- 

wiih important konographic motlft; jk ibid,, p. HQ mil fig, m, pp. 215-216 (fish motif); p. 22&t with sheet g : 24 (a 
horned doty); and p . I 10-1 12 and Tig. 42.1 (headi of > hull and a buffalo plus * complete gam); according io Dr PJL 
Allchin, ihe fragments of the last mentioned bowl have not been pieced together 

29 Cf. Giorgio Stacul, Excavation at Locbam Ul (Swat, Pakistan), East and West N.S. 26.1-2 (1976). 13-30; id, 
Dwelling- and storage pils at Loebanr TIJ (Sw4t, Pakistan): 1976 excavation report, Eojs and (Vest N.5, 27,1-4 (1977), 
227-253; id., Loehanr in (Swat, Pakistan): 1979 excavation report. East and Wtsi N.5. 30,1-4 (19S0). 67-76; id 
Prehistoric and Pratohisioric Wr. Fataftw fc. 3000 1*00 S.C). lititnio Italiano pci tl Medio ed Esiremu Orkmc] 
Reports and Memoirs 20. Rome 1987. 

30 Cf, Us cate* opbtiMs de Tlndus, Paris 1988. 17-128, with fiirthci references, and chapters 2-3 below. Save few one 
(which could not be located for photography at the Excavaiioni Branch), all the published seals from Mchrgarh are included 
hi our volume. The definitive rrptm Di1 Lhe escavationi ai Mehrgarh, which is forthcoming, will contain many male A 
collection of almost 850 incited "patter's marks" (mm die first four season of excavations at Mehigarh hive been analysed 
and published in an exemplary manner by Gonztguc Quivron, Us mxtqura incssSes sur lea potent? de Mehrgarh au Baluchi- 
sian, do milieu du IV* milldnaire I la premtke moilk du lll e nrilKaiire. Palter,cm 6 (1980). 269-280 (ten sherds me 
illustrated photographically, otherwise the marks only are shown in drawings); none of this material is included in CM 2. 

1 See, fm example. J. F. Janige, Chronology of the earlier periods of the Greater Indus as seen from Mehrgarh, Pakistan, 
in: B. Allchin (ed.), South Arim Archaeology 1981, Cambridge 1984. 21-21; id.. Continuity and change in the North 
Kachi plain {Baluchistan. Pakistan) at the beginning of ihe second millennium B.C., in: J. Schotsmans and M. Taddei 
(edi,). South Asian Archaeology 1983, Naples 1985, Vol. 1, 35 68. 

32 Ci REM Wheeler. Newly found at Mohenjti Daror A huge 4000-year-old granary. The Hbatrated London Ncv/t (ILN) 
20 May 1950, 702-3; id.. New light on the Indus Civilization: The Mohenju-Dam granary, ILN 27 May 1950. 813-6; id. 
Man f Animah in 4000 year-old Mohenjo-Dan], ILN 3 June 1950, 854-5; id., The Indus Civilization, 3 ed.. Cambridge 
1968; Leslie Akock. Exploring Pakistan's past: The first year's wort Pakistan Quarterly 2.1 (1952). 12-16; id„ Pottery 
sequence from Molienjo Dam: R.E.M, Wheeler's 1950 "Citadel Mound" excavations, in: George F Dales and J M. Kennycr. 
Excavation* Oi Mohtnjo Data, Pakistan The pottery. University Museum Monograph 53, Philadelphia 1986. 493 551. The 
potsherds with graffiti or seal impress tons from these excavations are reproduced here after Wheeler's original plates 
published in Dale* and Kenoyer 1968; almost all of the seal* discovered by Wheeler (ILN 3.6.1950, 855) have disapDeared 
fcf. p. tx), 

33 Cf. George f. Dales, Re-opening Mohenjo Daro excavations. ILN 29 May 1965, 25-27; id. New investigations at 
Mohenjo-daro. Archaeology 18.2 (1965) 145-150; Id., South Asia's earliest writing - still tmdeciphered. Expedition 9;2 
(1967). 34-39 (including illustrations of most of the new Inscription* from Mohenjn-djrok id.. New inscriptions from 
Moenjo Dana. Pakistan, in: Barry L Eichler (ed ), Kramer Anniversary Volume, Kevelacr Hi Nrukirchen 1976, 111-123; 
George F. Dales and Jonathan MhtIe Kcnoycr. ExcavdWr ai Mohenjo Daro, P a k: si an The pottery. Universal Museum 
Monograph 53. Philadelphia 1986. 

34 See especially M. Jansen and G, Urban (edi ). Interim Reports Vtrf 1: Reports an field work carried out at Mohen/a- 
Dara Pakistan 1932 S3 by the t$MEO-Aachen -University Mission, Aachen & Roma 1984; id, (eds). Interim Reports Vet 
2; Reports an field work corned out at Mohenjo-Daro Pakistan 1983 84 by the hMEO-Aachen University Mist ion, Aachen 
* Roma 1987. Mosi of the new Indus reals and inscriptions discovered by the German Italian team have been published in 
these reports, but some unpublished ones arc included in CIS! 2, - A detailed and manysided archaeological assessment of 
Ihe seats and inscriptions from Mohenjo-daro is given by Ute Fmnkc Vogt tn her Still unpublished doctoral t||«i s , Qi e 
Glyptik aus Mohenjo. dare |-ITt, Berlin 1990. 












XVIII 


INTRODUCTION 


sherds inscribed with the Indus script" 35 , but nothing more has been made known of these. Three 
such potsherds are published here for the first time. 

Nausharo: This Early to Late Harappan site in the Kachi plain has been excavated by the 
French Mission led by Dr Jean-Fran^is Jarrige since 1986. 36 

Nindowari-damb: This highly interesting site is situated in the Omach Valley of South Balu¬ 
chistan and, representing the local Kulli culture, dates to the Early and Mature Harappan periods. It 
was excavated for three seasons in 1962-65 by Dr Jean-Marie Casal. 37 

Periano-ghundai: This site in Nonhem Baluchistan is (at least partly) Early Harappan. Only 
small excavations have been carried out by Professor Walter A. Fairservis 38 and Dr M Rafiquc 
Mughal. 39 

Pirak: This Post-Harappan site, situated in the Kachi plain that connects the Indus Valley with 
Baluchistan, was excavated under the direction of Dr Jean-Marie Casal and Dr Jean-Fran^ois Jarrige 
in 1967-1974. 40 In addition to seals representing the Post-Harappan period, three Mature Harappan 
period seals were found on the surface. 41 

Rahman-dheri: This Pre- and Early Harappan site was excavated by Professor Farzand Ali 
Durrani of the University of Peshawar in 1976-1982; 42 he has resumed the work in collaboration 
with Dr George Erdosy in 1991 43 Six small seals with script-like signs are said to come from this 
site. 44 In addition to the well known bone seal representing the ealiest period (Rhd-1), we publish, 
for the first time in photographs, a large number of Early Harappan graffiti here. 45 

Sarai Khola: Altogether 68 graffiti on potsherds, constituting "potter’s marks", were discovcr- 
ed 4 * from the Early Harappan occupation of Period II. This site near Taxila in the North-West 
Frontier Province was ex cavated by Dr F.A. Khan and Dr M.Abdul Halim in 1968-71. 47 


35 Pakistan Archaeology 1 (1964). 44 

- Cf. Jean-Francois Jarrige. Excavations at Mehrgarh-Nausharo. Pakistan Archaeology 10-22 (1986) 63-131- id 
Excavations at Nausharo: 1986-87. Pakistan Archaeology 23 (1988). 149-203; id.. (Excavations at Naushm». Pakistan 
Archaeology 24 (in press). 

7 ^ JC " , ' M " iC C “* 1, Nindow,,ri: A Neolithic *iu: in South Baluchistan. Pakistan Archaeology 3 (1966). 10-21 A 
pi. v-xvii; kL, Nindo damb. Pakistan Archaeology 5 (1968). 51-55; Gregory L. Po.sehl. Kulli An exploration of an 
ancient civilization in South Asia, Centers of Civilization 1. Durham. North Carolina, 1986. 51-55 Dr Jean Francois 
Jarrige « preparing a full report on Nindowar, for publication. CISI 2 includes all the three seals discovered in the granar.es 
38 T* w y lWO c haVe h**" pub, “ hed previously), but the important painted graffiti have to be left for CISI 3 

Arck ™*>*™' «" — Loralai Districts. West Pakistan. Anthropological 

Papers of the Amencan Museum of Natural History 47.2. New York 1959. 404 Fairservis (ibid. 359 and fi* 59^ records 
sherds with potter s marks" as surface finds ' m ”** ord * 

40 f f R ‘ r “’“ MUS> '’ 1 - E, P 1< " ,1 “"' S to N,,,,hcm Balucliijun. Pakistan Anhatoksn 8 (1972) 137-150 

^ -^i «V. „ ,, 

0 “r ^ °~ ^ -»— - 

Cf. F.A. Durrani, Rahman Dheri and the birth of civilization in Pakistan RulU,im ,1 . .. ~ - 

University of London. 18 (1981): 191-207; id Indus Civilization Evi^nl . T\ f ‘ * ArcHagt > l °^ 

Indus Civilisation - ,Vrw perspectives. Islamabad .981 133-138 A ^ * Ahmad D “' 

H.nnu Valley,. ,n: B B. Lai and S.P. Gupta (eds.) Frontiers i L ti e- T * ^ 

melioration Volume. New Delhi 1984 505-510- id Rekman Dh a ^ l<Ui0n Sir MorUmgr W heeler Com 

• T-»pW Uni.wity: ZZSTwX. "Zll'TZ ZV" ' " ‘"t 

Go™, Valley Rah™ Dhcn no 1. PaluM 6 (Zm L 1 E,C,, *"° n ‘ " 

Cf. the forthcoming paper by George Erdosy in: Adalbert J. Gail (ed.). South Asian Arrh^t^ too, d , 

Cf. M. Rafiquc Mughal, Genesis of the Indus Valley Civilization Lah u a °‘^> • Berlin 

«.U could « be l«.,ed when Mr. Jy*. i "T ^ " ’’ 

45 The provenance of most or potsherd, with graffiti said to Z flTi *Z T m VOlUmC - 

painted on the sherds. It should be noted, however, that some of them Ld no LnlTfic^ by ** " ,arkin8S 

list). 00 '«nOfication mark whatsoever (see the data 

46 See M. Abdul Halim. The pottery of period, IA and II with incised ootter, nr «--rr. . „ .. 

(1972), 95-99 A pi. xxii A A B. Only a small pm of these 68 taci^sET m * kl ’ Ar ^logy 8 

ttzss zjst:T srrd? couw * 

.12 <«* I— pun .ucludb,, D. M Rafiquc Mu***. luuod^ „ dw SsZ'^uV' 












INTRODUCTION 


XIX 


Sibri-damb: This is a Laic Harappan silc, clearly affiliated with Central Asia, situated 8 km 
south of Mehrgarh and 2 km west of Nausharo in the Kachi plain, excavated by the French 
Archaeological Mission to the Indus under the direction of Jean-Fran^is Jarrige in 1981-82. 4 * 

Tarakai Qila, an Early Harappan site in the Bannu District, NWFP, was excavated in 1978-79 
by the Cambridge-Pcshawar Universities Joint Expedition under the direction of Dr F.R. Allchin. 49 

In addition to excavations of individual sites, extensive archaeological surveys have been 
carried out in different parts of Pakistan. Thus Baluchistan has been explored by Dr Beatrice dc 
Cardi in 1948 and 1957 (in Kalat), 50 by Professor Walter A. Fairservis in the early 1950’s (Zhob, 
Loralai and Quetta Valleys) 5 * and in 1959-60 (in Us Bela) 5 *, by Professor George F. Dales in 
1960 (Makran coast), 53 Robert L. Raikes (in the Omach and Jhalawan Valleys) 54 and by Dr M. 
Rafique Mughal in 1962 (Las Bela and the coast) and in 1972 (Central and Northern Baluchi¬ 
stan). 55 With the exception of the two sherds from Periano-ghundai, however, no material from 
these surveys is included in this volume. The same applies to the surveys in Sind by Dr 
Muhammad Sharif 56 and by Dr Louis Flam in the 1970 s 57 

The Cholistan Desert, or the area of the former Bahawalpur State, was surveyed in 1974-77 
by Dr M. Rafique Mughal, who identified 264 sites belonging to Early, Mature and Ute Harappan 
periods. 58 Nine sherds with graffiti coming from the 166 Mature Harappan sites covered by this 
survey have been published in a preliminary way 59 , and graffiti with Indus script are reported to 
come also from the 72 Cemctery-H culture sites. 60 So far this and other relevant material from the 
Cholistan surveys could not be published in the Corpus. 


Cf. Marielle Santcmi. Sibri and the South Cemetery of Mehrgarh: 3rd millennium connections between the northern 
Kachi Plain (Pakistan) and Central Asia, in: Bridget Allchin (ed.). South Asian Archaeology 1981, Cambridge 19*4, 52-60; 
lean Francois Jarrige. Les relations entre 1’Asie ccntrale mfcidionale. le Baluchistan et la valMe de llndus k la fin du 3 e et au 
dtfbut du 2* millionaire, m: L'archiologie de la Bactriane ancienne. Paris 1985, 105-118; Les cities oublides de I'lndus, 
Paris 1988. 111-128. 

49 See F.R. Allchin and J.R. Knox. Preliminary report on excavation at Tarakai Qila (1978-79), in: Herbert Hirtel (ed.). 
South Asian Archaeology 1979. Berlin 1981. 245-250. We are glad to be able to publish all the four seals discovered at 
this site (described but not illustrated lx„ 249f.) plus some unpublished graffiti. 

50 Beatrice De Cardi. Excavation and reconnaissance in Kalat, West Pakistan: The prehistoric sequence in the Surab region. 
Pakistan Archaeology 2 (1964). 86-182. 

51 Cf. Walter A. Fairservis. Jr.. Excavations in the Quetta Valley. West Pakistan. Anthropological Papers of the Amer¬ 
ican Museum of Natural History 45.2, New York 1956; icL, Archaeological surveys in the Zhob and Loralai Districts. West 
Pakistan. Ibid. 47.2, New York 1959. Fairservis has recorded altogether 362 Pre- and Early Harappan graffiti on potsherds 
(with about 50 different marks. 18 of them made with the finger nail) as coming from Damb Sadaat l-IH, Kile Gul 
Mohammad IV and other sites in the Quells Valley (1956, 328-335 and pi. 14) and others from Kalat and Chagai regions 
(1956. p|. 31 and pL 30: 2). These could not be included in CISI 2. 


52 


Cf. Walter A. Fairservis. Jr.. The roots of ancient India, 2 ed.. Chicago 1975. 189-205. 


3 Cf. George F. Dales. Harappan outposts on the Makran coast. Antiquity 36 (1962). 86-92L; id.. A search for ancient 
seaports. Expedition 4.2 (1962). 2-10. 

54 Cf. Robert L. Raikes. Archaeological explorations in Southern Jhalawan and Las Bela, Origini 2 (1968), 103-171. 

55 Sec M Rafique Mughal Exploration in Northern Baluchistan. Pakistan Archaeology 8 (1972). 117-124; id.. 
Explorations in Northern Baluchistan. 1972: New evidence and fresh interpretation. Proceedings of the llnd annual 
symposium on archaeological research in Iran . Tehran 1974, 276-286. 

56 Cf. Pakistan Archaeology 8 (1972), 133-137. 

57 Cf. Louis Flam. The palaeogeography and prehistoric settlement patterns in Sind. Pakistan (4000-2000 B.C.). Ph.D. 
dissertation. Dept, of South Asia Regional Studies. University of Pennsylvania. 1981. Ann Arbor UMI 82-07,956; id.. 
Recent explorations in Sind: Palaeogeography. regional ecology and prehistoric settlement patterns, in: J. Jacobson (ed.). 
Studies in the archaeology of India and Pakistan. New Delhi 1986, 63-89. 

58 See M. Rafique Mughal. New archaeological evidence from Bahawalpur. in: Ahmad Hasan Dam (ed.). Indus Civilisation 
- New perspectives (Islamabad 1981): 33-41 A. map + pL 1-22 (without the illustrations also in: Man and Environment 4. 
1980. 93-98); idem. Recent archaeological research in the Cholistan Desert, in: Gregory L. Posschl (ed.), Harappan 
Civilization. New Delhi 1982. 85-95 ♦ pi. 7.1-12; Mughal’s full report entitled Archaeological surveys in Bahawalpur has 
been in press since 1980. but has not yet come oul 

59 See Mughal 1981 (cited in the preceding note), pi. 13. The quality of this photograph does not allow reproduction. 

60 See ibid., p. 37. 












XX 


INTRODUCTION 


2 . Indus seals and (he external contacts of the Indus Civilization 

Immediately after the first news about the discovery of the Indus Civilization wa$ published in 
1924, h became apparent that the Hamppans had been in contact with the ancient Western Asiatic 
cultures. Evidence for this was Indus seals coming from Susa. Ur. and other Mesopotamian sites; 
among these were both square stamp seals of a purely native Harappan type and seals combining 
Harappan and local elements such as the cylinder form. 

Later, a few round Indus seals (a type rarely found in the Indus Valley) were discovered along 
w ith a large number of local round stamp seals on the islands of FaiJaka and Bahrain in the Gulf, 
where excavations since the 1950 f s have revealed a flourishing "Dilrnun Civilization" When 
furthermore one purely TJilmurHype 1 ' seal (L-123 in CISI 1) was found at Lolhai, attention 
concentrated on cuneiform sources dealing with the early maritime trade of Mesopotamia, Three 
oreign countries arc referred to as participants of the sea trade: DUmun (closest to Mesopotamia), 
Magan and (farthest away) Mduhfca. Magan is now widely identified with Oman and the opposite 
coast of Makran, and Meluhha with the Harappan realm, 61 

, ™ e rel « ion *WP of ihe Pre-, Early and Mature Harappan cultures of the Indo-Iranian 
borderlands with those of the Iranian Plateau and Central Asia have begun to be properly under¬ 
stood only dunng the past decades. The French excavations in the Kachi Plain (Mehrgarh, Nau- 
sharo, Stbn and Ptrak), the Italian excavations at Shahr-i Sokhta in Seistan « the American 
excavations at Tepe Yahya in Southeastern Iran « and the Soviet excavations in Central Asia 64 
are among the most crucial archaeological research projects of recent times which have created a 

mle'nu 6 7 71^ These “ nd 0lher researches have also illuminated the important 
, P p. y ! e Pr0 ‘°" E lml( e s and ,heir successors in the increasing cultural interaction in the 
Iranian Plateau in the thud millennium B.C. 6 * 

imereonnec^ 15 ' *"1* ^ thW ™ Ilennium BC - and ** beginning of the second millennium, 
” " .^ r AgC Cult “ res n ° urished in M*** of Iranian Plateau and southern 

V . H 1 Hissar 111 and rela “ d Sites), in Soulhcm Turkmenia 

(Namaaga V and related sties), in Kerman (Shahdad). and in ancient Margiana (Gonur Togolok 

2J5J ln a ^K D f ^ “ d S A P f' in NOnhen ' Af6haniS “ ) ' excavations of Mehrgarh VW 
, . the ^ achl plaJn “‘l the ‘reasury of Quetta" found in 1985, and the Late Harannan 

T m “* .. ,h ~ r "““ isss; 

. ht-1) and Mehi (Mehi-1) in southern Baluchistan, 66 suggest that immigrants from Eastern Iran 

M? iana) reached BaluehisI “ n and i°*cr Indus vallev around 
J01I B.Q.and gradually adopted the waning traditions of the Indus Civilization. 67 

62 L° T r f fCrenCfea 50 thcsc f,rSl Pwe CISI 1. n. 

6 3 Muiriziu Tosi (ecLj, Prehistoric Seistm, VoL 1. Roma |%3. 

C.C. Umberg.Karlnvifcy. Excttvalims al Ttpt Yahya. JraA m?-IQhQ i_ ■ „ E , , , _ . 

H “ im *■ ^~-“in xeel'zTo 

^ n ™ « ^ 

*"*■ “ ^ “ *■— 

■he Indien Oce.n. (Wnu 1 “ d "* 0,u! 10 

<~Z A>i * ; “V™ 1 - ,he A,vm ' - a™*-. 

Cf. Wfa** Jame , Us ££ en« I'Aiie l , 3 l T --*■ H «- 2 

3= <1 .□ ddbut du 2 C millcniire, , n: LArcMo^i, ' l, * il& 68 "»<*■ 

■“ Mthrs ‘ rh « viii) - « - ~ ;r ^ zzzts: 















INTRODUCTION 


XXI 


Distant interaction between Central Asia and the Indus Civilization is evidenced earlier during 
the Mature Harappan period. In the late third millennium B.C., there was a Harappan settlement at 
Shortughai on the Oxus in Northern Afghanistan. 6 ® Two Harappan seals have been unearthed at 
Altin Tcpc in southern Turkmenia, 69 and one clearly Bactria-Margiana type stepped seal comes 
from Harappa (H-166). 70 The few cylinder seals found at the Indus sites have so far been thought 
to indicate connections with Mesopotamia, where this seal type is most characteristic. However, we 
now know that the late Bronze Age cultures of Central Asia, for example, also used cylinder 
seals. 71 and the cylinder seals from Sibri (our Sb-2 & 3) are closely parallel to them, 72 as is one 
cylinder seal from Mohenjo-daro (M-419 in CISI 1). 

Thus the seals have played a leading role in the discovery of not only the Indus Civilization but 
also of its external relations. 

3. The function and iconography of the Indus seals and tablets 

Preserved ancient seal impressions prove that the Indus seals have served as instruments of 
control in administration and trade, as in ancient Western Asia. Some seal impressions have been 
made on wet clay pots before firing. Other impressions have survived on clay tags, once attached to 
bales of goods whose integrity they thus guaranteed. The study of the seals and seal impressions in 
combination with their archaeological contexts and details of style and manufacture can significantly 
contribute to the understanding of economic and administrative practices. 

The quality of an Indus seal increases with its size, and the largest and most expensive seals 
must have belonged to important persons or institutions. Since the seals were probably worn in a 
visible fashion by their owners, as is suggested by the cord holes, they are likely to have second¬ 
arily functioned as indicators of the wearers' rank, seen at a distance by the size of the seal. 73 

A few Indus seals are carved hollow and provided with a lid so that something - most prob¬ 
ably a magic charm - could be kept inside. This has generally been taken to support the old 
hypothesis that the seals, besides their primary function as administrative instruments, also served as 
protective amulets. In addition to the script, the majority of the Indus seals contain iconographic 
motifs, whose clearly religious nature has suggested an amuletic function. The pictorial motifs not 
only rank among the very best preserved examples of Harappan artistic expressions but also provide 
some of the most important clues to the Harappan religion and to the accompanying inscriptions. 

Iconographic motifs arc found on ''tablets" as well. An important general characteristic of this 
category of objects is that they comprise many identical duplicates. The incised "miniature tablets" 
from the lower levels of Harappa are considered to be the earliest known examples of the fully 

vow 8.-2. Jahrtausend v Chr.. Mainz 1987, 102-111; Lambcrg-Karlovsky 1986 cited in the preceding note. There arc 
many reasons to think that these immigrants from Central Asia represent the first waves of lndo-Aryan speakers; see Asko 
Parpola. The coming of the Aryans to Iran and India and the cultural and ethnic identity of the Disas. Stadia Orient alia 64 
(1988), 195-302. with further literature. 

6 ® Cf. Henri Paul Francfort 8c M H Poltirr, Sondage prdimtnairc sur I'ltablisscment protohistorique harappecn el post¬ 
il arappden de Shortugal (Afghanistan du N.E.), Arts anatiquet 34 (1978), 29-79 & pi. I-VII; H.-P. Francfort, The early 
periods of Shortughai (Harappan) and the western Bactrian culture of Dashly, in: B. Allchin (ed.). South Asian Archaeology 
1981, Cambridge 1984, 170-175, id.. La Civilisation de l'lndus aua rives de 1‘Oxus. Archeologia 227 (1987). 44-55. 

V See V.M. Masson. Seals of a Proto-Indian Type from Altyn-dcpc. in; Philip L Kohl (ed.). The Bronze Age 
Civilization of Central Asia: Recent Soviet Discoveries . New York 1981, 149-162, with Kohl's note ibid., si*. 

7() Cf. A. Parpola, in Stadia Orientals 64 (1988), fig. 7 on p. 283. 

71 Cf. I.S. Masimov. Novye nakhodki pecaley epokhi bronzy c nizovie Murgaba. Sovetskaya Arkkeologtya 1981; 2, 
132-150; the Central Asian seals have a connection with the Syrian and Cappadocian seals of the first half of the second 
millennium B.C., cf. Dominique Col Ion. First impressions Cylinder seals in the ancient Near East, London 1987. 44 and 
I42f. 

72 Cf Marielle Santoni. Sibri and the South Cemetery of Mehrgarh: Third millennium connections between the northern 
Kachi Plain (Pakistan) and Central Asia, in: Bridget Allchin (ed.). Sooth Asian Archaeology 1981. Cambridge 1984. 57. 

7 ^ Cf. Asko Parpola. The size and quality of the Indus seals and other clues to the royal titles of the Harappans, Tamil 
Civilization 4. 3-4 (1986), 144-156. 












XXII 


INTRODUCTION 


developed Indus script. 74 Later, incised tablets give way to embossed ones, often massproduccd in 
moulds. Sometimes great numbers of similar tablets (especially H-859 ff.) have been found to¬ 
gether, or their find places are very close to each other. This has suggested that most of the tablets, 
both the embossed and the engraved ones, may have functioned as tokens of votive offerings or of 
visits to temples. 75 

The engraved copper tablets of Mohenjo-daro form an unusual class of inscribed objects, in 
that their inscriptions and iconographic motifs are clearly interrelated; this is not so obvious in other 
classes of Indus inscriptions, although some exceptional cases may occasionally be found. 76 

The interpretation of the iconography of the Indus seals and tablets constitutes a major scholarly 
challenge. Various comparisons have been made with the ancient West Asian glyptics as well as 
with the later an of classical India. 77 


4. The enigma of the Indus script 


From (he very beginning, the enigmaiic Indus script has been the most tantalizing one among 
the many problems presented by the Harappan culture. The short inscriptions hold an answer to the 
most debated question concerning this early urban culture, that concerning its language. Many 
attempts at deciphering this unknown writing system have been made ever since the first specimen 
was pubhshed in 1875. and all sons of 'solutions’ have been proposed. But no unanimity has been 
reached even on the basic issues. On one point, however, most scholars agree: the direction of 

wntmg usually is from right to left (but in the seal stamps, engraved in mirror image, from left to 
ngnt). 

. „ U ) nf T Una ' ely ! paCe does no1 allow us 10 emer imo a ^tailed discussion of the Indus script and 
US study here. For this, the reader is referred to literature published elsewhere . 78 

5. Earlier documentation of the Indus seals and inscriptions 

There is little to be added to this chapter and its notes as it is found in CISI 1 . Because the 
chapter is not indispensable to CISI 2. it is omitted here and reference is made to volume I which 
discusses, among other things, the computer-drawn editions of the Indus inscriptions and indexes or 
concordances to them, compiled by Mr I. Mahadevan” and by a Finnish team of scholars.*" 

See M S. Vats. Excavations at Harappa. Delhi 1940. Vol. I 324ff cf hnwrve, . M v _ 

r-a tzr * A “ — “ - -* -—— * zz 

evidence supporting this conclusion. ^ Clsf^Ci ^ I93 *' ^ ** 349 351 For and iconographic 

yr k ^“ “ d resu,u * 

der Harappa - Knit nr. Prihtstonsche Bronzefunde I: 6. Munctai 1985 ^ ^ Tdfelchen 

further reference,, see CISI Txvi,. £ most c l989 ' <*« F«s). For 

i» the as yet unpublished doctoral thesis of Ute FraSe-Vogt Die Clyptik^M *7™' ° f 

78 Asko Parpola's forthcoming hook Sealed Sew afTe £ ^henjo-Daro I HI. Berlin 1990. 

wh Ihe problem* reining , 0 ihc Indus script, , .. . f"J*"**' °> • /«•*«<»• cMOmltm dot. 

bibliography In ,he mesn.Me. TZ! , w 

id . Religion recced *. tndu, £ l ^ZZ nill ” 3 »»-* 

(1988). 114-135: and die .lightly longer discussion L^withTl^ r P,Cl ° +gf,ph,C *h t ion 6 

literature mveying attempts at decipherment ,s: Ahmad Nab, Khan, lid CISI ''T' ' "***" *° ** 

decipherment. The Archaeology 2.2 (Karachi 1990), 28-35 ** SCr *^ t ^ survey of attempts for its 

77. New Delhi 1977 T "“' COKOrdam W “**"• Manoi '* of the Arch.eologic.1 Survey of Indie 

University of HeWaki. ReseJrt“rr^'*'. hTCiuW a Dc ’“ nme "' of A,i *" “d AMon Sludres. 

*"*■ ,wd 2 - ,,8o: *• ^ — - *. » ,an - *■ ^ 













INTRODUCTION 


xxin 


Such standardized text editions and indexes remain a necessary complement to the photographic 
Corpus. 81 

6. The purpose and scope of the Corpus 


The texts in standardized editions and concordances are based upon the subjective judgements 
of individual scholars, and they do not display all the intricacies of the originals. Moreover, they 
contain numerous admittedly doubtful readings. Objective photographic documentation of the origi¬ 
nal inscriptions thus is a necessary complement to such textual studies. Photographs of the original 
objects are equally indispensable tools for the historians of art and religion studying the icono- 
graphic motifs and for archaeologists engaged in a comparative study of the objects. In short, there 
is no replacement for good photographs of all the Indus seals and inscriptions. 

A major part of the material has been published in photographs in the excavation reports of 
Mohenjo-daro and Harappa: they illustrate altogether roughly 2500 objects. These publications have 
long been out of print and difficult to procure. It is true that they have been reprinted in recent 
years, but the quality of the photographs in the reprints is so low that they are practically unusable. 
The published photographs of the rest of the material, on the other hand, are scattered in a number 
of publications, and their mere collection involves great difficulties for persons without access to 
specialized libraries. 

It would have been simple enough to collect and reproduce the old photographs of the earlier 
publications. Such a procedure, however, would have resulted in a book that would not have fully 
satisfied the serious student of the Indus script and iconography. The size and quality of the illus¬ 
trations, even in the original reports, is not always sufficient Moreover, the available material is 
documented incompletely, for, as pointed out above, there are many hundreds of unpublished 
objects: objects coming from excavations conducted at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa after the 
conclusion of the official excavations; a large number of duplicate and broken or indistinct objects, 
especially from Harappa; and objects from excavations and explorations carried out in India and 
Pakistan during the past few decades but not yet published in full. 

A pan from their inscriptions and iconography, the seals form an important category of artifacts 
in their own right, which we have seen to have much relevance for the study of the external 
relations of a culture as well as of its internal processes. Therefore, in addition to all the inscriptions 
in the Indus script, this Corpus will contain all the Harappan seals, including those without any 
inscription. In the case of other object types, ’inscription’ has occasionally been understood rather 
liberally so as to include, for example, sherds whose incised or painted motifs may rather be 
considered as art. Such motifs, however, may be important for understanding the form of the signs 
of the Indus script. 

Moreover, the concept of ’Indus seals’ is to be understood in its widest meaning. In addition to 
the Indus Civilization proper, the Corpus will, with certain restrictions, cover the Early and Late 
Harappan periods as well and also include all the imported seals of foreign types coming from 
Harappan sites. 82 Furthermore, ’Harappan’ is understood to include closely related cultures such as 
that of Kulli in Baluchistan. Thus, for example, the Central Asian type compartmented metal seal 
coming from the Kulli site of Mehi was included in CIS1 1. 

The relatively few seals and clearly Harappan-type inscriptions from the Late Harappan period 
have been included in th e Corpus, but Late Harappan graffiti have been excluded, with a few 

81 After the completion of CiSI 3. additions ahd revisions will be made in the Furnish computer corpus (the new 
photographs published in CISI were not available at the time when the current version was compiled), and the reference 
numbers of the inscriptions will be replaced by those of the Corpus, so as to case comparison with the photographs The 
typological and iccmographical classifications will be revised as well. 

82 Cf. chapter 2. In the past, some clearly imported seals have often been treated as Harappan; in order to prevent this 
from happening in the future, the word "foreign" or “intrusive" has. space permitting, been put in the page caption for such 
seals. 
















XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


exceptions. These graffiti are short and appear to be just "pot-marks" rather than real writing. Still, 
they are potentially interesting to the student of the Indus script, even though not to the same extent 
as the Early Harappan pot-marks. The problem is their great number, coupled with the difficulties of 
drawing a line between Late Harappan and Post-Harappan and of finding the original potsherds. 

7. The documentation of the objects 

Original objects and their present-day impressions 

Because the texts carved in mirror image on the seals are to be read as they appear in the 
impression, the repons of the excavations at Mohcnjo-daro and Harappa published just the im¬ 
pressions. However, the impression may not faithfully reproduce all the features of the original, and 
the original always remains the ultimate authority. On the other hand, the impression is needed not 
only because it shows the inscription in its proper form but also because it sometimes reveals details 
not immediately visible by the inspection of the original. For example, it is harder to see an 
inscription on a rough or transparent or multicoloured surface than in an impression taken on a 
neutral and unweathered material. Thus the original and its impression complement each other and 
make double checking possible. 

_.. c ' VC ha " CndCaVOUred 10 P ublish an impression of an object in this Corpus whenever the object 

r e x3l llT' '°^ UCe ° ne - “ i$ ' hC CaSC W1,h ,he stam P «*. An impression is publish- 
^exceptionally ,f an object mean, to be read directly is obscure and the impression clearly helps in 
understanding the text or iconography involved. 7 V 

l' as ,f k ; n up0n , itself ,he msponsibity for making new impressions of the often 
ohoto^nhi ™ Unfortunately, there was no provision for impressions in the later phases of 

reT£*bT mCanS n ° impression is available a large number of objects, and for 
the rest, there is no option between alternative pictures. The use of silicone rubber was also sue 

gested at one point, but the Department came to the conclusion that the condition of the objects dofs 
no, perm,, this material to be used. Has,,cine is no, ,ha, sensitive, so in the ca« of £« S 

deWcTI' JerfeJfustalTvT 31 " 3 ^ *" Pam ° f ,he in “ ri P>'°" a " d *»' 

aevice are perfect. Usually, however, the new impression is much beticr than the old one If no 
new impression was available or if iis quality was not good, recourse was taken „ nIH 

•Jazz's zzrr^ - 

misunderstandings, for some seals have a reversed direcdon of writing. “ n ° US 

Broken objects 

Many seals and tablets have crumbled into two or more nieces tf,„ .h 
such broken off pieces are also often lost *3 Old ohotonmnh k * WCTe excava,ed - and 

if they clearly complement each o.her and ^ ^ " CW 

that is better than its present state. A broken object may have becnrai^'V ^ f prCSCrvation 

. t .m, We must therefore record here one ,ueh rjecle .hich tortTllT 0 *^"“' P '“" "* "“•M* P“' h>*«h«r 

collection of the Mohenjo-d.ro The two pof M , m I J ’ ’’ S M ">** »« P»=,o g ,. p h,„ 8 

numherr DK ,0*87 „d DK IBM. end Utev were „„ i Ji —«*, joined h.ve the ion 

different level, (-3.22 end -8.88). ' ,,lh ° f '’30 «d on die ,1th Febmvy , 93 , " 
















INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


and if not, how much is missing. This can be checked by examining its back or sides. In the case 
of the regular square seals, this is often superfluous, because the estimate can be made from the 
front side itself, but for the rectangular seals without iconography it is indispensable to see the flank 
side and the position of the cord hole that is usually pierced through its centre.® 4 

The different sides of the objects and their specification 

Many of the objects have two or more sides with inscriptions, pictures or engravings of one 
kind or another. It is clear that all such sides had to be photographed and published. But the photo¬ 
graphy earned out for the Corpus was extended to comprise even the empty sides. This procedure 
made it possible to verify afterwards whether a given side of a specific object really is empty. 
Another reason for documenting all the sides of the objects was the need to check the excavation 
number (and often the museum number as well), which has usually been painted on the object 85 

Originally the publication of all the sides of all the objects was contemplated, but this would 
have been too expensive, and for most of the users of the Corpus, the sides now left out are of 
little interest So only a selection of the uninscribcd sides is published in the Corpus: they are 
shown when needed to give an idea of the shape of the object, especially if a divergent type of seal 
is concerned. 

The different sides of the objects are indicated in the Corpus by means of capital letters, which 
normally have the following significance: A = the obverse (which is taken as the point of reference 
for the other sides) / B = the reverse / C = the upper side / D = the right side / E = the lower side / 
F » the left side. The principal (rectangular) sides of the three-sided prisms are numbered A. B, and 
C and their (triangular) ends D and F. 

The corresponding lower case letter is used to refer to the impression taken of any of the 
sides, for instance, a = impression of A. Correspondingly, aa = impression of (impression) a, 
implying a modem copy of the original object (e.g., Ad-8). 

Different inscriptions (for instance, impressions made with separate seals) on any one side of 
an object have been numbered with Arabic numerals following the letter for the side, and usually the 
corresponding numbers have been marked beside the respective inscriptions alongside the photo¬ 
graph. The order is, conventionally, from left to right and from top to bottom. 

If two or three different photographs of the same side are published, the code number for the 
second, third, fourth and fifth photograph is followed by the Latin words bis, ter, quater and 
quinquies respectively. Such photographs arc usually arranged in the temporal order, from the 
oldest (first) to the latest (last). If different parts of the same side arc shown in several photographs 
(as in the case of the cylinder seals), these are given a separate Arabic numeral put within paren¬ 
theses after the letter indicating the side: M-418 A (1), M-418 A (2), etc. The same is done if one 
picture gives a general view of a side and another an enlargement of its inscription (as in stamped 
pots and earthenware bangles). 

The aim of these conventions is to make each photograph and the reference to it unambiguous. 

The scaling and printing of the photographs 

In the excavation repons, the seals arc normally depicted in their natural size, but this scale has 
proved to be too small for a clear recognition of all details of the inscriptions and iconographic 
motifs. The policy adopted in this Corpus is to print all the sides of all objects bearing either in¬ 
scriptions or any kind of iconography in double size (2:1, or 200%) whenever possible, and their 

84 This can sometimes be tricky. For example. the bole going through the middle of the rectangular seal H 639 is not 
visible because it has been filled with chalk as part of the conservation measures. 

85 In some cases the excavation number painted on the object differs from that assigned to it in the lists of the excavation 
reports; sometimes the difference is likely to be due to a mistake in the report; sometimes the number painted on the object 
has become obliterated and has been erroneously restored. 














XXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


uninscribcd sides (if illustrated at all) either in the natural size (l;l, or 100%) or in the double size 
(200%) . All exceptions to this rule will be specifically indicated in each case. Most of the seals 
from Pirak are shown in their natural size (100%) - this percentage is given in the page caption - 
and exceptions to it in casu. 

As the great majority of the photographs are in the same scale, one will have an idea of the 
relative size of the different objects. This is important, because in the case of the seals, for instance, 
the relative size seems to convey information of its own, 

rhe major part of the prints were made on plastic in order to avoid the distortions due lo the 
stretching of we I paper. Moreover, the original objects were measured during the photography, and 
most of the prints have been enlarged by using ihese measurements* 86 As the actual measures of 
the objects will be listed separately in the third volume and are partly available even now in the pub¬ 
lished reports, the reader will be able to check the size of the photographs. 

In this volume, deep etching has been used rather more extensively than in volume one, with 
due awareness of its dangers 87 

8. The criteria of arrangement and related conventions of the Corpus 

General considerations 


Theoretically, the Indus seals and inscriptions could be classified in several ways. For exam¬ 
ple, the inscriptions could be arranged according to the pictographic sequences they contain, 
owever, this arrangement would only serve the needs of scholars interested in the script and is 
uter left to the concordances of the script. Jf the concordances are keyed to the Corpus, cross- 
reference and verification will be easy, whatever the principles of arrangement. 

Ernest Mackay, in Further Excavations at Mohenjo-daro. arranged the objects coming from 
Mohenjo-daro according to the different areas of the site and the absolute depth of the finding place 
from the surface.** He wished to control the data from the point of view of archaeological dis¬ 
tribution looking for evolutionary and other trends. The result was chaotic, objects of different 
types and sires are mixed with each other. Unless one knows the number of the object it is 
impossible to locate it without scanning through the entire material. In the present Corpus the 
archaeological context is taken into account in the arrangement of the objects when it is feasible and 

* s ™ ““ » 

fc i'le” Thl IT T" ki “> ” 

moriT C 7 P T °T 0bjECt - itS P rovenance - ‘H*. form, material, iconographic 
mottf, suae, style and state of preservation have been chosen as parameters in the Corpus m Hus 

hWiHI ” 7.” 7 d '7 h,Ch makes a neat la J’ oul P° ssiblc ' was flowed by Sir John 

the lttdus emuvahm ind ' less s “ u >** Ms - v « - 

The Is. criterion: the owners of the objects; and the overall publication plan 

i, ^ SSS 

T GrCl1 ™ tjicn ,n sca *' m * * U ** T^oicgraphu in this valuing However if ,h c 

Wik v,stb] c m the picture, there i* » dement of mot. for the scale is ^ ********* 11 baiwl * 

object. This appMe* UJ the photographs taken at Harappa ^1 Lth.vro Ky Mr S M ^ ° f 

the expedition of Mr Violin™ prcvifcd us with ^ ™ IW ^™ 1 for ** P«« 

Cl, e.fc.* E. Mack ay, Furlher Eicavmkw oJ ^ah^nto-darn Delhi l<m Vnl n , 

o„ cr. m. j t a, lndla KMn 3 













INTRODUCTION 


XXVII 


into three volumes according to the first criterion of physical location and ownership of the original 
objects. In this the Corpus of Indus Seals and Inscriptions follows the example of the Corpus of 
Minoan and Mycenean Seals, for instance, which is divided into different volumes according to the 
museums in which seals are preserved. Thus the first volume of the Corpus presents the collections 
housed in the museums of India, the second volume the collections in the museums of Pakistan. 89 

The third volume will contain the relatively few objects known to exist in collections outside 
India and Pakistan and the large number of lost objects, which are not directly documentable but 
must be published as old photographs only. Besides addenda to the previous volumes, this third 
(and for the time being last) volume will also contain a detailed catalogue of all the objects of the 
Corpus, documenting (in addition to the excavation and museum numbers, which are given pro¬ 
visionally in the first two volumes as well) such matters as the archaeological context, measures, 
notes on the material, manufacture, text and iconography, and published references. Furthermore 
this information will be fully indexed. 90 

This second volume, then, contains 2138 Indus seals and inscriptions physically existing in 
public and private collections in Pakistan. As far as possible, we have tried not to publish old 
photographs, but to procure new, better ones. When originals almost certainly existing in Pakistani 
collections could not be located, however, we have resorted to reproductions: this is the case with 
the graffiti discovered by Sir Mortimer Wheeler at Mohenjo-daro. If better pictures of such objects 
arc obtained later, they will be published in the third volume. 

The 2nd criterion: the provenance of the objects; and their numbering system 

It is clearly undesirable to lose control over the sitewise distribution of the objects; a purely 
typological arrangement mixing objects from all sites would be inadvisable. The site from which the 
object comes has to be a primary parameter of the classification. 

Now that seals and inscriptions coming from one and the same site will be distributed in sev¬ 
eral volumes, a flexible new numbering system is required which will both allow additions at will 
and make it easy to place the object in its proper context. 91 The Corpus of Indus Seals and 
Inscriptions employs a separate consecutive numbering for each site, prefixed by a letter code 
which is more easily remembered than a numerical code. The major sites have a short, one-letter 
code. These sites are, moreover, arranged in each volume according to the total number of seals and 
inscriptions found at them, in descending order. The sites which are "smaller” (in respect to the 
number of seals and inscriptions found at them) have a two-, three- or four-lettered code as far as 
possible corresponding to their standard archaeological abbreviations, and they are arranged at the 
end in alphabetical order for easy reference. (See the table of contents.) The letter prefix for the site 
is followed by a dash and the number of the object assigned to it by its place within the classi¬ 
fication sequence in each volume. 92 


89 We went to emphasize that the order of the volumes is due simply to the fact that the Indian material first reached the 
stage when publication could be begun and has no political implications. In fact, the possibility of leaving out the volume 
numbers altogether in order to avoid the issue was considered, but then dropped as impractical. 

90 This arrangement has practical reasons. The third volume will contain a smaller number of photographs than the first 
two. Therefore, it has more space to accommodate both the lengthy catalogue and the indexes, which naturally should be 
cumulative. 

91 In the recent editions and concordances, the Indus inscriptions from Mohenjo-daro and Harappa were keyed to the 
published excavation reports. For this system and its limitations, see C1S1 1. p. xxvii, n. 71. 

92 The sections of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa in CISI 2 begin with M-595 and H-266 to H-275. These numbers, which are 
out of the sequence here, are used in order to "fill" the "empty" numbers due to unavoidable omissions in CISI l. Similarly. 
H-356* fills the void created by the fact that H 356 in fact is the same as H-354; the asterism keeps the new H-356* apart 
from the deleted H-356. 
















XXVIII 


INTRODUCTION 


The 3rd criterion: The stratigraphy of the site 

After the site, the next criterion of organization of the photographs in the Corpus is the strati- 
graphical context of the object. If known with certainty, the objects coming from any given site are 
arranged in separate sequences corresponding to the stratigraphically established periods of habita¬ 
tion. At Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, for example, the stratigraphic context of the vast majority of 
the objects is suspect and there is no possibility at this stage of even attempting such a subdivision. 
No subtides are given if only one period is distinguished and this is Mature Harappan; otherwise the 
one period is specified within parentheses after the site name. 

At Rahman-dheri. again, most of the graffiti (being surface finds) can be only generally 
ascribed to the Early Harappan period, though this consists of Period II and Period III strati¬ 
graphically established at this site. 

The label Early Harappan" is used in this volume in its now widely current conventional sense 
first suggested in 1970 by Dr M. Rafiquc Mughal, i.e. as corresponding to M Kot Dijian" and dated 
to c. 3000-2500 B.C. The term implies that there is an unbroken cultural continuity between this 
Early Harappan” phase and the following "Mature Harappan" phase dated to c. 2500-2000 B.C 93 
While Mature Harappan" is usually understood to be a synonym for the fully urbanized Indus 
Civilization possessed of the Indus script, in the sites of the Northwestern Frontier Province like 
Hissam-dhen or Gumla it is rather a temporal designation of the cultural phase, which in many 
respects remains similar to the "Early Harappan" phase. Thus most of the graffiti coming from 
Hissam-dhen and Gumla seem to represent "potter's marks" rather than the Indus script. 

The phases preceding the "Early Harappan" are conventionally labeled "Pre-Harappan", though 
there is a similar cultural continuity between "Pre-Harappan" and "Early Harappan". 94 "Late 
Harappan refers to the last phase of Mature Harappan with some admixture of traits of non- 
Harappan ongin or to the post-urban phase of the Harappan culture in the beginning of the second 
millennium B.C., and "Post-Harappan" to cultures of the second millennium B.C with considerably 
fewer traits of Harappan origin; however, this distinction between "Late Harappan" and "Post- 
Harappan" is not to be taken too categorically 95 


The 411., 5th and 6th criteria: the object type, form and material; and the symbols 
in the page captions 

sim C ^T" I' ' he T ° f ,hC ° bjeC ’ TaWe 2 (p - 433) llsts *» onto and explains the 

simplified symbols for the typological subcategories of the Mature Harappan seals and tablets used 

thepage captions of volume two. The captions over each page call for some further explanations 
The caption lists in order (I) the full name of the site and the numbers of the objects coming 
from that site which are illustrated on the page concerned; (2) the principal object type spelled out in 
letters; (3) simplified symbol(s) specifying the form of the object(s); (4) ma^naf (if metal) 
iconographtc mottffs) and size classics) expressed with Roman numerals. Occasionally exceptkJi 
scaling or archaeological period is mentioned. Only one-line captions are used, and informal! tha! 

7*7“**“ '«-* .rta, 

Sf [Y'77 U,b “ H “*W" te AJ G U | (ed.). South AmJ ArlhZolog, * 

In fact Dr Mughal himself now suggests that “Early Hararman" ch«. id , P**** 3, 

2J0O B.C.. with .wo ,ubph»e. .be leue, „( . h ,eh wjuldcot^tde w!T! 1T * ,p "’ lr ° m c - 3400 “ 

Harappan" he .peak, of -*e ClulcoUlhic Period", dalcd to c 5000 3400 B C 7/M T r ‘’’u'“ d ' n, “' d 
die Early Harappan culture hr the Grew Indiu Valley; 1971 90. South Irion S. A Fu, ' t>c ' e,l,ic "“ or 

thoughi to follow this suggestion (and this is reflected in the f J 6 (1990), 175-199. We had at first 

corrigenda on p. 447). bu“ later cabled thu chsTge oi‘"° ^ ^ ° f « 

prevailing terminological confusion. 8 * ” ' U ° WedJy WouW have added to the already 

On "Late Harappan". see especially M. Rafiquc Mughal, The af _ ... . 

period in the Indus Valley, Lahore Museum Bulletin 3.20990,. 1-17. r*,. I8 C,V,hMUon the Ute Harappan 













INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


cannot be accommodated or that seems superfluous is dropped, starting from the last categories. The 
order of the subcategories in the captions has been reversed on even-numbered pages, in order to 
place the first and most needed subcategories closest to the page number on the right. 

We have tried to keep the typological classification as simple and unambiguous as possible. 
Four broad categories are distinguished: (1) seals & seal impressions, (2) tablets. (3) graffiti on pot¬ 
tery and (4) miscellaneous other objects. These main groups, which are functionally different from 
each other, are subdivided further according to formal criteria. The material of the object is taken 
into account next, but only in the form of a broad division into non-metal and metal (mainly copper 
or bronze) objects, which are placed at the end of each class. 

Seals are the most important category of Indus inscriptions in terms of frequency, so they are 
placed at the beginning. The most common basic form of the Indus seals is square, which is placed 
first, and the next frequent form, rectangular, is placed after it. Within both forms, subcategories are 
distinguished. 

The square seal normally has a perforated boss at the back, which apparently served both for 
hanging the seal by a cord and as an aid in making the impression. This type is presented first, with 
the rare example of a metal (silver) seal at the end (M-l 199), followed by the exceptional seals of 
this category: those that have been inscribed on more than one side and those having a case 
(probably for an amulet) inside them. Next follow the square seals where the boss is absent: first 
perforated seals with one side inscribed, then perforated seals with two or more sides inscribed, and 
then the unperforated seals similarly subdivided. These seals without a boss share similar inscrip¬ 
tions and iconographic motifs with the ordinary seals having a boss, so they have been placed after 
them, before the seals with nothing but a swastika or some other geometric motif, although the 
reverse of these last-mentioned seals does have a perforated boss (usually smaller than the normal 
seals and undivided). 

The normal type of rectangular seals has a profile that is straight on the front side and convex 
on the back side with a hole for the suspension cord going through the middle. 96 Whenever the 
side profile is rectangular, or the back has a boss similar to that of the square seals, this is shown 
by publishing the relevant side(s). 

Other forms of seals arc rare, and in most cases these forms have been inspired by foreign 
models, if the seal itself is not a foreign import (see above, chapter 2). The round seals of the 
Indus Civilization have a perforated boss of the same type as the square seals and differ in this 
respect from the contemporary round seals of the "Dilmun" civilization that flourished in the Gulf 
area. In the Late/Post-Harappan period, round seals become the prevalent type (cf. Pirak), but they 
were not uncommon in the Pre- and Early Harappan periods either (cf. Mehrgarh). Cylinder seals 
come nexL 

The ancient seal impressions stand for the seals they were once made with, so they are placed 
next to the actual seals. A distinction is made between impressions on pots, which come first, and 
impressions on clay tags. Uninscribed sides of clay tags that have been attached to bales of goods 
are illustrated, if they bear significant traces of the package material. The tags have been arranged 
according to the number of seal impressions they contain, those with single impressions being 
placed first, then according to the iconography and the inscriptions of the seal impressions. 

There is a large group of objects which we have lumped together and called, neutrally, tablets. 
A basic distinction is made between stamped or moulded tablets, whose texts and iconography are 
in bas-relief , and incised or engraved tablets, whose texts are depressed. The incised copper tab¬ 
lets (placed at the end), so far found at Mohenjo-daro alone, can be divided into three groups 
according to their shape: square, rectangular and oblong (or long rectangular). 

Round tablets in bas-relief often bear a square seal impression on one side and arc fiat on the 
other side. These round 'tablets' are placed at the beginning, because they might also be classed as 

96 The arch of the back is usually smooth, sometimes edged, but as this distinction is often a question of degree, it is not 
systematically noted in the Corpus. 











XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


seal impressions; 97 they may have functioned as tokens of identification, or ‘passports* of repre¬ 
sentatives of the seal owners. Since some of the other tablets in bas-relief also may have been 
produced with the help of seals, these round tablets have not been separated from the rest. 

In both of the main categories, the embossed and the engraved, the tablets are subdivided 
firstly according to their form (and material) and secondly according to their iconography, size, and 
condition of preservation. We have tried to avoid form-based classifications that will lead to ambi¬ 
guous cases and practical difficulties: thus, the class of rectangular shape includes both thin and 
thick tablets and evenly flat tablets as well as tablets that are slightly thicker at the centre than at the 
edges. Finer classifications have been proposed, but they are difficult to cany through in practice 
and would complicate locating a given object in the Corpus. 

The term graffito is understood here to mean inscriptions incised on pottery before or after 
fmng and inscriptions painted on pottery. 9 * An attempt has been made to place graffiti with similar 
signs together, and the better preserved and clear inscriptions at the beginning. When the text is 
very fragmentary, it is often quite uncertain in which direction the potsherd should be read. The 
reader, therefore, must never take the solution offered in the Corpus for granted, but be prepared to 
turn the photograph around. 

Miscellaneous other objects is a heterogenous category accommodating the few odd objects 
that fall outside the other typological classes. In this volume, the stoneware bangles 99 are the most 
important object type here. 

The 7th criterion: the iconographic motifs 


, ,f e ' a ‘‘ ed , anal f' S °, f ' he ,cono S ra Phy of .he Indus seals and tablets is in preparation and will 
be published elsewhere.*<» What we offer here is a broad classification of motifs sufficient for 
organizing the material into coherent classes: unicorn' / urus / bison / zebu / buffalo / markhor / 
goat / deer / rhinoceros / elephant / tiger / hare / snake / gharial / animal group / joined animals / 
composite animal / anthropomorph / tree / cult object (variously interpreted as a manger, incense 
burner or filter) / ship / swastika / other geometric design. 

The unicorn' motif is placed first because it is the most common one of the Indus seals. The 

n n h e i h , r P ^ Sen, r ,his a " imal in P rofile ' *> '*>« ** one single horn is shown, has in all 

Tdonh Hi r IT ' a " ° f ,hC anCiem Near 6351 Alth ° u f* representation 

undoubtedly has had a mythological explanation and importance in the Harappan religion the 

two Zr , ' 'f * 3 real anima ' <Pr ° bably lhC or primigenius) which actually had 

o horns. It is in fact sometimes depicted as having two horns, but for the sake of analysis and 
classification these two-homed representations have been separated from the unicorns' under the 
immediately following heading of urus'. These two headings are followed by other bovids. these 
by capnds and other clov en-hoofed ruminants. 

I’ h™; 4T"“ “ “ “ Moh '" ; “ w ‘ u •** ■—**■ -vc. in ^ 

pXZA'fX zz&xz; ——-—- •. 

inscribed ob^ts recovered front MobeejoDsro. in: M J^c„ 1, o ^(.*'1 LT ” T? A - 

work carried out at MohenjoDaro. Pakistan 1982-8* b* the /.urn A J. // ' "ports vol 1 Reports on field 

M.A. HHin. sod Masstmo Vidalc. ,,M ' 

rsjrsr A - ~ 

Die Glyptik aus Zohenjo-LT*** “ Ule *-***'#. 
graphie und rdumlichen Verteilung. till (unpublished PhD thes.s Free II Vnier ^ k ^gcn Tur T »ologle m Ikono- 
^ in etc nee, fete, U coots, . de*^,^^^ 













INTRODUCTION 


XXXI 


An animal group consists of two or more natural animals appearing on one object, either 
separately or forming one scene like the two confronting bisons. "Joined animals" usually have 
more than one head (cf. M-l 169-1171) or, while composed of two or more animals, may not be 
complete animals. The "composite animal", again, is a complete beast whose body parts belong to 
different animals. 

Usually only one type of composite animal is represented in the seals. It has the horns of the 
zebu, the face of man, the tusks and the trunk of the elephant, the neck and front legs of the goat, 
the middle body of the 'unicorn', the hind legs of the tiger, and the snake for a tail (cf. M-l 172 to 
M-l 178). But in the incised copper tablets of Mohenjo-daro, one can distinguish several composite 
animals. The composite nature of most of the animals depicted on these copper tablets has rarely 
been recognized so far. 101 The "mastiff" of the excavation reports, for example, appears to be a 
composite animal put together of the zebu (horns), tiger (head and front pan of the body) and 
rhinoceros (back part of the body). In this fashion, we distinguish several different composite 
animals on the copper tablets (given separate Roman numerals when occurring after one another). 102 

The "anthropomorph" is another broad category, which lumps together almost all the scenes in 
which any man-like figure is seen. 103 

The 8th, 9th, and 10th criteria: the size, style, and state of preservation 

The size criterion implies that, other things being equal, the larger object comes first Only in 
two categories of objects has it seemed necessary to distinguish between several size groups accord¬ 
ing to their height, for both intrinsic and layout reasons. 

The rectangular seals 104 without iconography have been divided into three classes: (I) Seals 
more than 4.5 cm long 105 , the rest classified according to their height: (II) higher than 12.5 mm, 
and (III) 12.5 mm and less. For the sake of the layout each of the last two classes is divided into 
two parts, the intact seals (requiring no photos of the sides other than the obverse) being presented 
first within each of these four subgroups, the arrangement is in the order of descending height 
The square 'unicorn' seals have been divided into six groups: (I) 43 5 mm and more, (II) 35 - 
43 mm. (HI) 29 - 34.5 mm. (IV) 23 - 28.5 mm, (V) 17.5 - 22.5 mm, (VI) 17 mm and less. 

Within each size group, the 'unicorn' seals have been further arranged according to stylistic 
criteria (see table 1, p. 433) 106 . As in volume one, we have followed the scheme of Paul Rissman 
by placing first the unicorns with a "collar", then the unicorns with "hatched neck", and finally the 
unicorns with "hatched face". Each of these groups is hierarchically subdivided according to the 
details of the "cubic object" in front of the unicorn. 107 

As a general principle, badly broken objects are placed after the better preserved specimens of 
their category. The square seals showing broken unicorns' and broken 'bovids' (most of the latter 
being also probably ’unicorns’) are placed immediately after the 'unicorn' seals, not at the end of all 
the well preserved square seals; they comprise, moreover, some seals whose type ("square seal with 
a boss on the reverse") is uncertain. 

101 An exception it Paul Yule, Figuren, Schmuckformen i ind Tdftlchen der HarappaKvltur. Prfthistorische Bron/cfunde I: 6. 
Milne hen 1985. 32-34. Yule's analytic it somewhat different in detail. 

102 Cf. CISI I. xxxi. 

103 For detail*, cf. CISI 1. xxxi. 

104 No special type (indicated with a separate symbol) it given for the seal H 656, in which the bole going through the 
seal it seen exceptionally in the D and F tides (instead of C and E). Two seals which may or may not have had a hole going 
through the seal arc placed without a special symbol before the class “rectangular seals without a hole". 

105 The explanation given in CISI 1. p. xxxi. by oversight omits this (first) class based on the length. 

106 In table 1. each category usually hat several variant forms which have an equal value. 

107 Cf. Paul C. Rissman. The organization of seal production in the Harappan Civilization, in: Jonathan Mark Kcnoyer 
(ed.). Old problems and new perspectives in the archaeology of South Asia, Wisconsin Archaeological Reports 2. Madison 
1989. 159-170. Rissman's criteria are by no means the only possible ones nor necessarily the best: for criticism and a very 
detailed study with elaborate statistics, sec Ute Frankc Vogt. Die Glyptik aus Mohenjo Daro, Berlin 1990, I, 285ff. 









xxxn 


INTRODUCTION 


In the case of uninscribed seals, e.g. ihosc of Pirak and Mehrgarh. we have tried to keep the 
orientation of the obverse side the same as in the excavation report, unless there has been some 
reason to deviate from it 108 

9. A note on the material and production of the objects and on the colour 
photographs 

Space forbids discussing the material and production of the Indus seals and inscriptions in any 
detail here; for this the reader is once again referred to the excavation reports. It can only be noted 
that the great majority of the Indus seals are made of steatite, generally whitish in colour. The seals 
were First sawed and cut into their forms and then polished; the subject was outlined with a sharp 
point and then engraved with a drill. Finally the seal was coated with an alkali and heated. It seems 
that the alkali coating was applied mainly to dark steatite in order to make it white. Heating hardens 
the steatite, which is a very soft stone, and thus protects it against wear. The various stages of this 
process can been seen from different examples, the unfinished ones being particularly instructive. 109 

The moulded tablets arc normally made of terracotta or faience, while the incised tablets usually 
are of steatite or copper. 


Some selected objects are shown in colour at the end of the book, in enlargements as big as the 
space allows. Pre-. Early and Late/Post-Harappan periods are included, and preference has been 
given to objects not illustrated in colour elsewhere."® In pan, these 36 pictures are aimed at doing 
justice to the artistic beauty of some superb pieces of Harappan an, and partially they are intended 
to convey an idea about the colour and material of the objects. Naturally some Enlargements, such 
as that of the Fig-deity" seal (M-l 186), are also meant to help scholars in distinguishing important 
iconographtc details. No scale is given, because the relative and absolute sire of the objects may be 
seen from the black-and-white photographs, to which they are keyed. 


Fof PI amnia, th. ium — - - r __ # m. r . _ 



1987, and Lzs citfj oubhtes de find us. Paris 1988. 


am Indus, Mainz 













'unicorn'1 JSJ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 595 


1 


Mohenjo-daro 



M-595 D M-595 a 





















2 


MOHENJO-DARO 62J SEALS Ml 'unicorn'l 



M-621 a 










rjr* 




'unicorn! 1 [©J] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 622 3 


M 622 F 


M-622 A 


M-622 B 


M-622 a 
















4 MOHENJO-DARO 623 SEALS @] *unicorn I 


M-623 A 


M 623 B 


M-623 • 


M-623 D 











unicorn'! @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 624 


5 



M-m a 



M-624 4 











M-625 A 


M-625 A bis 


M-625 C 


M 625 F 


M-525 B 


MOHENJO-DARO 625 SEALS 


’unicorn I 


M-625 a 















unicorn 1 [®jj SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 626 


7 

















8 MOHENJO-DARO 627 SEALS @ unicorn I 



I'S* 















unicom’I @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 627 


9 



M-627 r bis 








10 


M0HENJ0-DAR06Z8 SEALS K®l| 'unicorn I 



M-62H A bis 














' unicorn'I jSJ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 628 


11 













12 


MOHENJO-DARO 629 SEALS {GBII ’unicorn'l 



M'629 > 







unicorn' l @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 630 


13 



M-630 A 


M-BO C 


M 630 B 


M-630 0 


M-630 * 






14 


MOHENJO-DARO 631 SEALS @| 'unicorn' / 




M-631 A 


M 63] a 


M-631 B 


M-631 D 








unicorn ’ 1 @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 632 


15 



M 632 B 


M-632 C 


M-632 E 


Mm D 


M-632 a 















16 


MOHENJO-DARO 633 SEALS to 


imicorn I 



M-633 A 


m 1 

v S I 

■V ^> v v 


r :Cl 


■ Si ^pBL 

% 

■l 




M 633 a 












’ unicorn’ I @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 634 


17 



M-634 D 


M-634 a 










18 


MOHENJO-DARQ635 SEALS @ 


'unicorn l 



M-635 B 















unicorn I |fl3 


SEALS MOHE/WO-DA/JOdiS 


19 








20 


MOHENJO-DARO 636 SEALS ®] unicorn'I 



M-636 a 


M-S3G F 















'unicorn’ I @| SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 637-638 21 



M-638 • 







22 


MOHENJO-DARO 639-643 SEALS 'unicorn I 



M-640 A 



M-640 • 



M-639 A 















23 


'unicorn II 


SEALS 


MOHENJO-DARO 644-645 



M-644 A 


M 644 a 



M-644 A bis 



M-644 C 



M 644 B 


M-644 D 



M-645 A 


M-645 a 








24 


MQHENJO-DARO 646-647 SEALS KQ3 


‘unicorn II 






















unicorn' H @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 648-650 


25 





M 648 A 


M 649 A 


M 643 a 


M 649 i 


M-650 A 


M-6501 















M-651 A 


M-fiM * 


A bis 


M-652 A 


M-652 A bis 


M'652 


26 MOHENJO-DARO 651-652 SEALS @1 'unicorn' // 










'unicorn fl 


SEALS MOHENJODARO 653-655 27 



M-m . 



M 654 A 


M'654 ■ 




M-655 A 


M-655 a 








28 MOHENJO-DARO 656-6SS SEALS [3§J ‘unicorn It 




M-656 A 


M-65S A 


M-657 A 


M 657 « 


M-&5S a 


















30 MOHENJODARO 662-664 SEALS |§J) 'unicorn 11 



M-664 A 


M 664 a 











■unicorn'll @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 665-667 


31 






M -665 A 


M -666 A 


M-665 a 


M-666 a bis 


M-667 A 


M-667 a 







32 


MOHENJO-DARO 668-670 SEALS @1 ' unicorn'll 





M-663 « 


JVM69 a 


M-668 A 


M-669 A 


M 670 A 


M-670 a 

















33 




SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 671-673 


M -672 t 


'unicorn 1 U 


M-m a 


M-673 A 


M-&73 a. 











34 


MOHENJO-DARO 674-676 SEALS [®jj unicorn'll 





M 674 i 


M-675 A 


M-675 i 


M-674 A 


M-676 A 


M-676 a 














•unicorn'll SEALS MOHENJODARO 677-678 35 



M-678 A 


M-678 a 













36 MOHENJO-DARO 679-682 SEALS @1 'unicorn' IJ 





M 679 i 


M-680 (Urn 

Ml 

M*6SG (2) A 

(fid 

M-AfiO (2) a 


M-679 A 














SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 683-686 


37 


'unicorn II 




M-683 (1) • 



M-683 (2) A 


M-683 (2) a 



M-683 a 





M-685 A 







38 


MOHENJO-DARO 687-690 SEALS @ ’unicorn’ll 




M-687 a 


M 687 A 


M-688 A 


M-689 A 


M-690 A 


M-690 a 

















39 


'unicorn II [SJ] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 691-693 



M-691 A M-691 a 



M-692 a 



M-692 A 



M-693 a bis 


M-693 A 























40 


MOHENJO-DARO 694-698 SEALS @1 unicorn'll 









41 


unicorn'III [®D SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 699-702 


M 699 A 


M-699 a 




















42 MOHENJO-DARO 703-705 SEALS @1 ‘unicorn III 






H 7« . 


M-703 A 


M -704 A 


M-703 j 






M-705 a 











unicorn * III @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 706-708 43 



M*706 A 


M-706 ■ 




M-70S A 


M-70S a 






















44 


MOHENJO-DARO 709-711 SEALS @1 ' unicorn' Ul 





M-m . 


M 710 A bis 


M-7D9 A 


M-710 A 


M-711 A 


M-711 fl 

















■unicorn'HI @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 712-714 


45 






M-712 A 


M-713 A 


M-712 b 


M-713 • 


M-7I3 A hi* 


M-713 * bis 


M-714 A 


M-714 a 



















46 


MOHENJO-DARO 715-717 SEALS 


'unicorn' Ill 





M-7J7 \ 


M.7I7 t 











'unicorn 7 HI [Sf| SEALS 


MOHENJO-DARO 718-721 


47 





M-719 A 




M-71S Abb 


M-719 t 


M-719 A bis 



M-721 A 


M-721 a 













48 


MONENJO-DARO 722-725 SEALS gj 'unicorn III 





M 722 A 


M-722 a 


M'723 A 


M-724 A 


M-725 R 


M'723 n 


M-725 A 


M -725 E 










49 


'unicorn' 111 j®J] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 726-727 



M 726 A 


M 726 a 



M-727 (2) A 


M-727 (2) a 











50 MOHENJO-DARO T2R-73I SEALS @] 'unicorn* III 



M-728 A 


M-72S 1 



M-729 A 


M-729 m 




M-730 A 


M-731 A 







’ unicorn'III [5J| SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 732-733 51 





M-732 A 


M-732 > 





















52 


MOHENJO-DARO 734-736 SEALS 'unicorn' /// 





M-7J6 A 


M-734 A 


M-m A 


M-734 a 


M-735 a 


M-736 a 















53 


unicorn' III @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 737-739 



M-7T7 A 


M-m * 



M-739 A 


M-739 B 


M-73? D 
























54 MOHENJO-DARO 740-742 SEALS HD 'unicorn III 



M-142 a 


M-742 i 















unicorn'lll ® SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 743-745 




M-744 A 



M-744 ■ 



















56 MOHENJO-DARO 746-748 SEALS @1 'unicorn Iff 




M-746 m 


M 747 A 


M-747 t 


M 748 A 


M-748 a 









unicorn III @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 749-751 


57 





M-749 ft 


M-75D A 


M’750 ii 


M-749 A 


M 751 A 


M-751 ■ 





















tim 


58 


MOHENJO-DARO 751-754 SEALS @ 


'unicorn' HI 







M-752 A 


M-753 (l) A 


M-753 (2> A 


M-752 ■ 


M-753 ■ 


M 754 A 


M-7'54 a 








•unicorn III @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 7SS-757 


59 





M 755 A 


M-756 ■ 


M-756 A 


M'755 * 


M-757 A 


M-757 » 









60 


MOHENJO-DARO 758-762 SEALS @0 ' unicorn' III 




M-760 A 


M-T61 A 


M-7G2 a 


M-75S i 


M-760 a 


M-761 i bit 


M-75S (1) A 


M-759 A 


M -m m 


M 759 B 


M-762 m A 









61 


’unicorn Hi 



M-76J ■ 



M‘764 A 



M 766 t 



M-7$7 A 



SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 763-767 









62 


MOHENJODARO 76S-770 SEALS @ 'unicorn 111 





M-770 a bis 


M-768 A 


M-769 A 


M-769 i 


M-770 A 


M-770 a 







unicorn’III @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 771-775 



M-775 A 


M-775 a 




64 MOHENJO-DARO 776-781 SEALS @ ‘unicorn IV 




M 778 A 


M-776 A 


M-77&* 


M-77? A 


M TV * 




M-781 A 


M-781 a 


M-779 i 


M A 


M-780 t 


M 779 A 













‘unicorn' IV @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 782-785 65 






M-7B2 A 


M-7S2 a 


M-782 A bis 


M-7S2 a bis 


m m A 


M-783 a 



M 7ft4 A 


M-785 A 



M-784 » 


M-784 a bis 


M-785 a 





















66 MOHENJO-DARO 786-791 SEALS @1 'unicorn' IV 



M-786 A 


M-787 A 


M-787 A bis 



M-786 a 


M-788 A 




M-789 A 


M-789 i 


M-790 a 


M-790 a bis 


M-790 A 


M-791 A 










I 


■unicorn’IV j©D SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 792-797 


67 



M-792 A 


M-793 A 


M-794 A 



M-792 ■ 




M -794 t 























| 68 MOHENJODARO 798-803 SEALS @) 'unicorn' IV 



a M-799 ft 




M-m ft 


M-802 « 


M-m ■ 













unicorn fV @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 804-808 






M-B04 A 


M-805 A 


M-S05 A bis 


M-BW * bis 


M-807 A 


M-SOS A 


M-SOB 9 


M-S06 A 


M-807 a 


M-806 A bis 












70 


MOHENJO-DARO 809-814 SEALS (®jj unicorn IV 



M-809 A 


M-810 A 


M 811 A 







M-809 t 


M-813 A 


M-814 A 


M-813 a 


M-814 a 


M-811 a 


M-812 A 


M-810 a 



M-812 a 















'unicorn TV @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 81S-819 




MB 17 A 


M 818 A 


M 819 A 




u-m i 


M-sn ■ 


m m i 





















72 


MOHENJO DARO 820 825 SEALS 01 ' unicorn* JV 




M 823 t 


M-824 n 


M-S25 > 







* unicorn IV [®|] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 826-830 73 




M-827 a bis 


M-826 a 


M-827 a 



M-830 A 


M 828 A 


M-829 A 



4 

C# 0 4 

M-830 a 


M 828 a 


M -829 a 

















MOHENJO-DARO 831-836 SEALS [HI 'unicorn'IV 



M 831 a 


M-832 a 


M-833 a 



M-834 A 


M-835 A 


M-836 A 



M** 34 • M-835 a 























M-839 A 


M 939 a 


M:^37 ■ bis 


M-B1& i 


M-837 A 


M-837 a 


unicorn' IV @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 837-841 


M-BT7C 


M-B31 B 


M440 A 


M-840 A bis 


u-m a 


M441 A 


M-838 A 













76 


MOHENJO-DARO 842-847 SEALS @1 'unicorn'IV 







M-842 A 


M-H42 a 


M-846 A 


M 844 A 


M-844 a 


M-847 A 


M-845 A 


M 845 a 









■ unicorn’IV (§J| SEALS MOHENJO-DARO H4S-852 


77 



M-850 A 


M-848 A 


M-849 A 




M-849 a 


M-850 a 


M 848 a 




M-851 A 


M 851 a 


M 852 A 


M-852 a 


M-852 a bis 



M-851 a bis 






78 MOHENJO-DARO 853-859 SEALS @1 ‘unicorn IV 







'unicorn IV @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 860-865 


79 



M'Stf) * 


M-861 t 


M-S62 i 




M-&60 A 


M-aei A 


M-S62 A 



m -m A 


M-865 A 


■ 






















MOHENJO-DARO 866-872 SEALS @] 'unicorn' IV 






M-868 A 


M-U9 A 


M 872 A 


M-872 a 


M-870 « 


M-867 A 


M-867 i 


M 871 A 


M-87I a 


M-S6G A 












unicorn IV @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 873-878 81 



M-876 a 


M-877 a 


M-878 a 






82 


MOHENJO-DARO 879-883 SEALS @1 unicorn IV 




M-S79 A 


um A 


M-881 A 




M-879 ■ 


M-8S0 i 


M-881 * 




M'882 A bis 


M-SB3 i 


M MJ A 



M-m t bis 







'unicorn TV @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 884-888 


83 




M-SSfe A bis 


M-SS6 i 


M-885 a 




M-887 * 


M-887 a bis 


M 888 a 


















84 


MOHENJO-DARO 889-892 SEALS @| 'unicorn' IV 



M-889 a M 889 a bis 



M-891 (1) a 


M-891 (1) B 


M-891 (1) D 


M-892 a 








unicorn /V (®J) SEALS 


MOHENJO-DARO 893-898 


85 



M-S96 a 


M-897 a 


M-898 a 










86 


MOHENJO-DARO 899-906 SEALS @1 'unicorn' IV 



M-S99 A 



M 899 ■ 





M-900 i 


M-902 A 


M-902 a 


M -900 A 



M-901 A 



M-901 a 



M-902 B 



M 905 a 



M-903 A 


M-904 A 




M-903 a 


M -904 a 


M -906 A 











M-90? A 


M-907 i 


M-911 A 


M-911 i 


M 912 A 


'unicorn IV 


M 908 A 


M'90E ■ 


M 910 a 


M-913 A 


MOHENJO-DARO 907-913 


M -913 m 


M 909 t 


M'909 t bis 











88 MOHENJO-DARO 914-922 SEALS 


WJ 'unicorn V 




M-9M A bi* 


M-914 i bis 


M-916 A 


M-9I6 s 


M-914 A 


M-914 i 


M-915 A 


M 915 t 



M-9I7 A 


M-918 a 


M 918 i 




M-920 ■ 


M-919 A 


M92I A 


M-922 m 


M-919 * 


M-921 t 


M-920 A 


M -922 A 

















unicorn V @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 923-929 



M923 A 


M-923 i 


M-924 A 


M 924 « 





M -925 A 


M’925 A to 


M -923 t bis 


M -926 A 


M-926 ft 


M-925 ft 


M-92B a 


M-939 (1) A M-M9 (2) A 


M’927 A 


M-927 a 



M-929 ( 2 ) a 



M-929 (1) a 


M-929 ID »1“ 


M*929 ft 


M*929 <2) a bis 













90 


MOHENJO-DARO 930-937 SEALS 


’unicorn V 


















'Unicom ' V [5f] SEALS 


MOHENJO-DARO 938-946 


91 



M-939 (1) A M-939 (2) A M-939 a 



-- - 

M-943 • M-944 A M-944 a 















92 


MOHENJO-DARO 947-954 SEALS [®]J 'unicorn V 



M M7 a 


M-947 a 


M 948 a 


M-948 A 


M-949 a 


m 9 n a 






M-950 A 


M 950 a 




M-952 A bis 


M-952 a 


M-951 A 


M-951 a 


M-953 A 


M 953 a 


M 949 C 


M-952 A 


(M-949 should 
be on page 143J 


& 4J 4 


M-949 F M-949 B 



M-954 A 


M-954 a 


M-954 (1) A 


M-954 (l)a 











'unicorn V [^Q SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 955-963 


93 







M-955 A 


M-955 ■ 


M -957 A 


M-957 i 


M-958 A 


M-960 A 


M-962 A 


M-958 « 


M-960 a 


M-959 A 


M-961 A 


M-960 a bis 


M-961 a 


M 959 a 


M-956 A 


M-956 a 


M-963 A 


M-963 a 


M-962 A bis 


M-962 a 

























94 


MOHENJO-DARO 964-972 SEALS @1, 'unicorn V 



M-965 A 


M 965 ■ 


M 964 A 


M-964 a 



M-966 A 


M-966 a 



M-967 A 





M 969 A 


M-971 A 


M-970 A 


M-972 A 


M-969 a 


M-971 ■ 


M-970 a 


IHH a 


M-966 a bis 


M 969 B 





















■unicorn-V @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 973-982 


95 







M-973 A 


M-975 A 


M-975 a 


M-977 A 


M-973 • 


M-977 a 


























96 MOHENJO -DARO 983-990 SEALS 








« 




M-9&4 A 


M 9»4 • 


M-983 A M-983 B 


* 

M-983 D 


m m A 


M-985 a 


M 936 A 


u -m « 


M-988 A 


M 938 i 


M 989 A 


M-9&7 t 


M-989 i 


M 987 0) A 


M 937(1) a 



M-990 A 


M-990 A bis 


M-990 a 













■unicorn' VI [®j] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 991-999 97 I 











M'991 A 


M-992 A 


M 993 ■ 


M-992 


M-991 * 


M-996 A 


M 996 A bU 


M -993 A 


M 995 A 



M-997 A 



M-997 * 




M-996 i 


M-996 A 


ms 

M 996 (!) ■ 


M 996 <2) ft 


M-999 A 



M-994 t 

M-996 (]J A 




M-996 (1) A bis 


M-996 (2) A 



M-999 A bis 




M-999 i 


M-999 a bis 




M 997 « bis 


M-998 ft 













98 MOHENJO-DARO 1000-1005 SEALS |®D 'unicorn VI; broken, bovid I 



M -1002 a 



M l004 A ter 


M 1003 a 



M-1004 a 





M-1000 a 


M-1001 a 


* 


M 1002 A 


M 1001 A 


M-1000 A 


M-1003 A 



M-1005 A 


M-1005 a 






















M-1008 A 


M-1009 A 


broken, bovid I. II @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1006-1011 99 











M-1012 A 


M 1012* 


]00 MOHENJO-DARO 1012-1017 SEALS @) broken, bovidlUIl 


M-1017 A 


M-V017 1 















broken, bovid III, IV @) SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1018-1026 101 



M1020 B 


M-1022 B 


M 1022 A 


M-1023 A 


M -1022 a 


M4022 A bis 


M -1025 A 


M4024 o 


M-1024 A 


M -1025 a 


M 1026 n 


M4026 A 


M4026 E 
















102 MOHENJO-DARO1027-1033 SEALS @] broken, bovid IV 






M-102S a 


M-1027 A bis 


M 1031 a 


M-1A33 a 


M-1027 A 


M-i033 A 


M-103I A 


M-1G32 A 


M 1032 i 


M-1027 i 


M-1029 A 


M-1029 a 


M-1030 A 


| 

M 1028 A 














broken, bovid IV jfflj] SEALS MOHENJO DARO1034-1042 


103 








M-I034 • 


M-1G3B A 


M-1D35 A 


fLW 

M 1039 B 


M-104I A 


M-1036 A 


M-1036 & 


M-1WI a 


M-1034 A 


M 1037 A 


M-1037 a 


M-1040 A 

J 

M'I042 A 


M 1038 i 










104 MOHENJO-DARO1043-1050 SEALS @ broken, bovid IV, V 



M-1043 a 


M-1043 A 



M -1046 A 


M 1046 A bis 


M-1049 A 



M -1050 A 


M-10S0 A bis 


M-IQ50 « 


M l 049 i bis 


M l050 a bis 













MQHENJO-DARO 1051-1055 


105 


broken t no motif extant SEALS 



M-1052 A 


M-1053C 


M-1052 B 


M-1053 ■ 


M-I055 A 


M-1H55 a 



M • 1055 A bis 


















106 


MOHENJO-DARQ J056-1062 SEALS @ broken, no motif extant 









M-1056 A 


M1Q56 B 


M-1057 B 


M-1060 A 


M-I060 C 


M-106 L A 


M-lOfifl a 


M-1061 a 


M-I06I a bis 






M-1057 * 


M-1Q59 A 


M-1062 A 


M-1062 a 








broken, no motif extant jSj] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1063-1067 


107 









M-1066 A 


M-1065 A 


M-I066 B 


M 1067 C 


pr 

M4067B 


M -1064 t 


M -1065 * 


M 1066 t 


M-1067 i 


jjf 

M-1064 B 

m 

M -1065 C 


M-1064 A 


M-1065 F 


M-1065 E 


M-1065 D 












108 


MOHENJO-DARO1068 1076 SEALS 


broken, no motif extant 





M-10T2 A 


W W «v 

M-1073A M.1073a M-1073 F M’l073 B 
















urus, bison (fUJ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1077-1079 109 



M-1079 a 


M 1079 * bis 























110 


MOHENJO-DARO 1080-1081 SEALS @J bison 





M-ioso A 


M-mi a 


M 1080 a 


M-iOSl a 


M-ioai c 









bison ®) SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1082-1084 


111 




M-10S4 A 














112 MOHENJO-DARO1085-1089 SEALS @ bison 



M-1085 A 



M^lOSfi A 



MO085 i 


M 4m . 


M*10B6 . bij 


Vi 




M-1087 A 


Ml 088 A 


M-10S9 A 


M L087 x 


M-1088 i 


M-\M9 m 
















bison 0] SEALS teOHENJO-DARO 1090-1094 


113 





M4090 A 


M -1090 A bis 







M-1091 a 



M-I093 A 


M-1052 A 



M'1094 A 




M-1092 a 


M-I093 a 


M I094i 














114 


MOHENJO-DARO1095-1100 SEALS @ bison 



M-10W .T M - ,W4 * M-109* m bii 


I. 




M-1100 A 


M-1098 A 


M -1097 A 


M-1TO9 A 











zebu |SJ1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1101-1102 


115 


















116 


MOHENJO-DARO1103 SEALS @ zebu 






M-H03 A 


I 

M-1103 D 


M-1103 A bis 


M -1103 ■ 


[ 

M -1103 F 







M-1107 A 


M l 107 » 











118 


MOHENJO-DARO1108-1110 SEALS @] zebu 





M-1109 i 


M 1108 A 


M -1109 A 


M 1108 a 


M-1110 A 


M-1110 a 









zebu @) SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1111-1113 119 





M-llll A 


M-1U2 A 


M-llll a 


M-ll 12 a 


M-1113 A 


M-1113 a 












120 


M-im A bis 


zebu 


MOHENJQ-DARO it 14-1116 SEALS 


M-Jl 14 A 


M4115 A 


M-| 115 « 


M-11J 6 a 


M-lllfi a 


M - H16 i bis 








zebu @ SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1117-1120 121 



M411? f2U 


M4 117 C 2 ) A 


M-H19 a 


M-1120 A bis 


M4120 * bis 



















122 


MOHENJO-DARO1121-1125 SEALS @1 zebu, buffalo 




* 

M-1121 A 


M l 122 A 


M l 123 A 




M-l 123 a 


M-1122 a 


M-l 121 a 



M-l 124 a 



M-I125 A 



M-l 125 a 


M -1124 A 






buffalo, markhor 


SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1126-1130 123 



M-1127 A 


M-l 126 A bis 


M-l 126 A 


M-l 126 * bis 


M-l 129 (1) A 


M-l 129 A 




M-1129 a 



M-l 130 A 


M -1128 a 

















124 


MOHENJO-DARO1131-1133 SEALS rhinoceros 




M-1131 a 










rhinoceros [gj3j] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1134-1135 125 




M-1135 A 


M-t 135 * 


















126 


MOHENJO-DARO1136-1140 SEALS @ rhinoceros 




M-1140 (1) A bis 

mm 

J89B 

m- 1140 Cl> ■ 


M l 136 t 


JSlifcr 

M-IB9C 


M l 139 B 


M 1139 D 


M 1139 A 


M-1139 b 









elephant g SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1141-1142 127 


M-U41 i 


M-1141 A 


M-l 141 A Mi 


Ml 141 .Ms 


M-U42 s 


M 1142 A 












L28 


MOHENJO-DARO1143-1147 SEALS 


@1 elephanx 



M -1143 t 


M-1145 A 


M-i 146 (I) A 


M4146 (2) A 


M-U47 A 














elephant @1 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1148-1149 129 



M -114S A bi* 


M-114* A 



M-1148 A ter 



M-1149 A 


M-1149 » 

















130 


MOHENJO-DARO 1150-1151 SEALS 


|Sj] elephant 



M -1150 A 


M-1150(1) B 



M415I A 


M4I51 4 













elephant @] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1152-1154 131 


M4151 A 


M-H52 A tw 


M-1153 A 


M-H54 AhU 


M-1154 i 


M 1152 » 























132 


MOHENJO-DARO1155-1156 SEALS @ elephant 





M-1155 A 


M-1155 A bis 


M l 155 a bis 


M-1155 a 


M-1156 A 


M-1156 a 











elephant (©fl SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1157-1160 133 



M l 159 A bi* 


M-1159 a bis 


M -1160 a bis 

















134 





M-l 167 a 


M l 162 A bis 


M-l 162 a 


MOHENJO-DARO 1161-1167 SEALS (SJ) elephant, tiger 


M-l 161 A 


M-l 165 A 


M-l 165 a 


M-l 166 A 


M-l 166 a 


M-l 161 a 


M-1162 A 


M-l 163 A 


M-l 164 A 


M -1164 a 








tiger with zebu's horns, joined animals (3J) SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1168-1170 135 






M-1170 A 


M-l 170 ■ 


M-1168 A 


M-1168 a 


M-l 169 A 


M-1170 B 


M-l 170 D 


M-l 169 A bis 


M-l 169 a 













136 


MOHENJO-DARO 1171-1174 SEALS [Mi Joined animals, composite animal 






M ini a 


M4172 A 


MUT2 a 


► 

M4171 D 


M4173 A bis 


M-1171 B 


M -1173 A 


M-U74 A 


M 1173 k 












M-in* * 


M-1173 * 


M-U79 A 


SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1175-1179 137 


M417S (2) A 


M 1175 (2) * 


M4176 (1) A 


M-ll76(l)» 


M-117S Cl) i 


M-U77 A 


M-1177 ft 


M-1173 (l> A 


M4175 A 


Ml179 ft 


M im a tis 


















*. t 

1\ 

s 




138 MOHENIO-DARO1180-1185 SEALS human-facedmarkhor, antropomorph 


M-USD A 


M-1I80 a 


M Am B 


I 

M-ilSI D 





M l 183 A 


M 1183 A bis 


M-1184 A 


M-11&3 a 


M 13S4 t 


M-im A 


M-l 182 A bis 


I 

M-1182 D 


M-1182 C 


M-1182 B 


M l 183 B M-l m D 



M-l 184 B 


M-U85 a 













aniropomorph g] SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1186 139 


M-US6 * bis 


M-1186 ¥ 


M-1186 A ict 


M-UU * 


M-1186 B 


M4186 E 











140 


MOHENJO-DARO1187-1189 SEALS §a]J building, no iconography 



mi m a 


M-H89B 


M 1139 ■ 












no iconography g SEALS MOHENJO DARO 1I90H94 


141 



M 1192 B 












142 MOHENJO-DARO11951199 SEALS 


no iconography, silver 



M-l 195 C 


M-l 195 A 



M-l 195 B 


l> 

M-l 195 D 




M-1I95 « 



M-l 196 A bis 


M 1197 A 


M-l 196 A 




M-1196 B 



M-l 196 i 


M-l 193 A 



M-119S C 


a ► 

M 1198 B M-l 191 D 


M-1193 



M-I199 A 



M-N99 B M-1199. 




























O' 1 SEALS MOMENJO-DARO1200-1202 143 


IOI 

M-1200 F M-1200 B M-I2Q0D 


M 1200 £ 

[M-Q49 ihauld be here] 








M-1200 C 


M-1201 A 


M-1201 A bis 


M-1200 a 


M -1200 c 


M-1201 a 



M-1202 A 



k 

M4202 c 




M4202 a 





M-1201 D 


M 1201 F 


M-1201 E 


M-1202 B 


I 

M -1202 D 












144 


MOHENJO-DARO1203 SEALS 



M-1203 A 



M-1203 F 


M-1203 B (100%) 


M-1203 D 















M4203 E 
















146 MOHENJO-DARO1204-1205 SEALS (c|J |Sj 




M-1204 C 

M -1204 A M-1204 F M-1204 B M-1204 D M-1204 a 



tv 


M -1204 E 





M-1205 E 



M-1205 E bis 


ft 

M -1205 D 
















^ SEALS MOHENJO DARO1206 


147 



M 1206 F 






148 


MOHENJO-DARO1207-1210 SEALS unfinished 






M-1207 i 

m 

M-1208 B 


M-1209 A 


M-1210 A 


M-1208 a 


M-1209 a 


M-1210 i 


M -1207 F 


M -1207 C 


M-1207 B 










unfinished 


SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1211-1215 


149 



M-1211 A 



M-1211 C 



M-1211 B 



M-1211 D 



M-1215 C M-1215 B M-1215 D 










150 


A 10HENJ0-DAR0 1216^1222 SEALS 


unfinished 


□ 



M'1216 A 



M 1216 E 


M-1217 A 




M4218 A 


>1 

M-12I8 F 



M-12IS C 



M-1218 B 



M-1217 B 


M-1217 D 



M'1222 F 


IM-858 should be hire; 

see p, 78 & iddndm| 


M -1222 B 


M-1222 * 












QjJ Q2 5£AI5 1223-1225 151 



M-1223 A 



M-1223 A bi s 



M 1223 * 



M-1224 ft 


M4224 b 



M-1225 A 


M-1225 B 




M-1223 C 

M ■ I 

M -1223 F M -1223 B M -1223 D 



M-1224 c 



■ 
M-1224 C 


* C 5 

3£3 

is S 

M-1224 F 


* 

ft 

« * 

M-1224 D 


M-1224 e 





M-1225 F 



M -1225 C 



M -1225 I 


1 

M 1225 D 




M -1225 ■ 


M-1225 b 





















152 MOHENJO-DARO J226 1229 SEALS Qj | ;j unfinished!crude 


M-l 226 E 



M 1226 D 





M-1226 A 



M-l 226 B 




M-| 229 E 










unfinished!crude SEALS MOHENJO-DARO12301232 


153 




M4230 F 


M-1232 P 


M 1230 A 


M-1230 E 


M-1232 C 


M-1231 A 


* 


M-1232 A 


I 


M4232 a 


M-1232 E 










154 


MOHENJO-DARO1233 SEALS Q] unfinished!crude 










unfinished!crude fj: AMORPHOUS SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1234-1235 155 



M-1I34 A 




M l 234 a bis 



M'l234 F 



M -1234 B 



M 1235 F 







M-1234 E M42 M e 




M-1234 b 




M4235 C 












156 MOHENJODARO1236-1240 SEALS AMORPHOUS unfinished/ crude 




M-1237 A+E 


i 



M im a 



M-I23S A bu 



M-I238 A ter 



M4238 a 

















SEALS 


MOHENJO-DARO1241-1250 157 




M-I243 A 



M-1243 i 



M-I244 A 


M 1244 ■ 



M-1245 A 





M-J242 A 




M -1245 a 












158 


MOHENJO-DARO1251-1261 SEALS 





M-J256 A 




M-125S A 



Ml258 ■ 



M-1259 A M4259 i 

































no iconography l SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1262-1263 


159 



M-1262 A 



M 3262 « 



M-1263 A 



M-12A3 E 



M-1263 A bis 



M -1263 * 










160 


MOHENJO-DARO 1264-1268 SEALS no iconography I. II 



M-1264 a 




-r 




M-1265 A 


M l 266 A 


M -1266 a 


M-1267 A 



M -1268 A 














no iconography II SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1269-1274 161 




M-12M A 



M 1269 » 



M 1271 A 


M 1270 i 


M-1272 A 





M -1270 A 



M-1271 t 


M-1272 k 



M-1273 i 


M-1274 ii 
















162 


MOHENJO-DARO 1275-1278 SEALS no iconography II 



M-1276 A bis 



M-1277 A 



M-1276 s bis 


M-1278 A 






M -1277 E 


M-1278 E 










no iconography It £53 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1279-1284 163 









M42S3 E 


M 12S3 A 


M-1283 a 



M im B 


M*12£2 a 




M-12S4 (2) A 


M l 284 (2) i 


M0284 a 









164 


MOMENJO DARO 1285-1289 SEALS no iconography // 








M-128S (1) a 


M-12B5 (2) * 


M-1286 A 


M-1286 a 


M-1288 A 



M-I2S8 a 



M-1285 (2) A 


M-12S5 (l}m 



M 1286 £ 


M-3238 C 



M-12S9 C 



M-1289 E 


M-I285 a 


M-I2S5 (1) C 


M 1285 (2) C 


M-12S5 C1J E M-1285 a) E 



M-1287 C M-1287 A 



1287 a 



M-I289 A 



M-l 289 a 















no iconography II SEALS MOHENJO-DARO12901294 165 




w 

M-1290 A 


M-1290 A bU 




M -1290 C 


M -1290 a 




M-1293 E 



M-1292 A 


M-1292 a 


M-1294 A 






M 1293 a 











166 


MOHENJO-DARO1295-1299 SEALS no iconography 11 



M-I295 E 


M4295 a 




M-1299 A 



M-1299 A bis 



M1299 a 


M1199 E 



















no iconography //, HI SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1300-1305 167 



M-1300 A 



M 1300 i 



4-1302 A 


M-1302C 



M-1302 * 



MI304 A 



M-1304 % 



M-13W C 



M-13Q1 E M-1301 i 



M-1300 E 

M -1303 i 



M-1303 a bis 



M-1305 A 



M 1305 a 







168 


MOHENJO-DARO1306-1316 SEALS ^3 no iconography Ilf 




M 1310 i 


M-1311 . 


M 1309 a 



M-mi A 




M-1313 A 



M-1313 4 



Ml 

m 

m 

M-1314 A 

U it 



M43I4 a 



M-1316 A bit 



M 1315 a 


M-1310 a 


M-1316 a bis 




























no iconography III SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1317-1323 169 



M-1317 a 



M-1318 ■ 



M-1318 a bis 



M-1319 A 


M-1319 a 



M-1321 a 



M-1319 C 


M-1319 E 





M-1322 a 


M-1322 a bis 



M-1323 C 


M-1323 A 




M-1323 B 




M-1320 A 



M-1323 a 


M-1323 E 

















170 


MOHENJO-DARO 1324-1333 SEALS ^3 <w iconography 111 




M-1325 A 


M-1325 * 


M4325 C 



M 1326 E 



M-1326 * 



M-mi n 



MA32A E M-I327 C M4328 C 


I PI » 

M-L327 F M Am B M-J327 D 



M-1327 E 



M4328 « 



M-L332 a 


M 1332 E 


M-1333 i 













no iconography III ^3 ^3 SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1334-1341 171 



M-I334 (1) A 


M-1334 (2) A 


M-1335 A 



M-1334 M-1334 (1) t M4334 (1) E 



M-133fi(2)A M-1336 (1) * 



M-\m A M-1338 E 



M-1334 (2) E M-1335 E 



M-134GA M-1340C 





M-1341 A 


M-1341 a 


M-1341 C 


M-1341 B 


M-1341 E 











172 


MOHENJO-DAR01342-1345 SEALS (^3 no iconography 





M -1342 C 




M-1342 B 


M-1343 C 


M-1343 B 


M -1343 D 


M-1342 E 



M-1345 A 


M -1345 C 










no iconography ship Q| SEALS MOHENJO-DARO 1346-1349 173 







M-1346 A 


v 

' f ' 


M-1346 A bis 


M 1346 • 


M-1349 A 


M 1349 A bis 


M -1349 B 


M -1349 b 






s 


174 MOHENJO-DARO1350-1352 SEALS no iconography 



M-1350 ■ 



M-1351 A 


M-1351 C 



M-1352 A 



M-1350 C 



M-1350 F M-1350 B 


► 

M-1350 D 



M-1351 a 



M-1351 E 



M-1352 a 



M-1352 A bis 


M -1352 E 










QJ £3 (l3 O SEALS MOHENJO-DARO1353-1357 175 



M-1354 A M 1354 « 






M-1355 E 


M-1356 F 


M-1355 F 


M-1356 A 


M-1356 ■ 



M-1357 A 



M-1357 E 








176 


MOHENJODARO1358-136! SEALS l^fJ [f3J no iconography 




M-I35S B M-1358 D 



M l35V C 

f Pt 

M-13SV P M-J359 B M-I359 D 



MO 35V E 















SEALS MQHENJO-DARO1362-1364 


111 


no iconography ^“ ““£1 



M-1362 c 



M1362 E 




M-1363 A 


M-1363 A bis 


M 1363 B 


M l 363 i 



M-1364 A 



M-136J a 





m 


MOHENJODARO1365-1368 SEALS Q3 ggj fWll 




M-1365 A 


M-1365 b 


M-I367 Cl) A 


M 1367 (2) A 


M-1365 C 


M-1365 F M-1365 D 


M-1365 i 



M-13S7 (2) F M-1367 (2) B M-1367 (2) D 


M-1367 « 












@) 0 SEALS SEAL IMPRESSIONS on pots MOHENJO-DARO 1369-1371 179 



M-1369 A 



M-1369 B 



M-1369 ■ 



M-1370 « 



M-1371 A (1) (50 %) 


M-1371 A (2) bis 









180 


MOHENJO-DARO 1372-1376 SEAL IMPRESSIONS on pots 






M-1372 A (1) (50 %) 


M-1373 A (I) (50 %) 


M 1373 A (2} 


M 1376 A (2) 


M-1372 A ( 7 ) 


M-1375 A (I) (50 %) 


M4375 A (2) 


M 1374 A (1) (50 %) 


M-1374 A (2) 


M-1376 A (1) 






SEAL IMPRESSIONS on pots MOHENJO-DARO 1377-1381 


181 



M-1380 A (2) M-1381 A (2) 








182 


MOHENJO-DARO 1382-1383 SEAL IMPRESSIONS on pots, on tags 












SEAL IMPRESSIONS on tags MOHENJO-DARO 1384-1386 


183 




M-13S5 A 3 



M-13S6F M-1386 B 


M-1385 A 14 



M-1385 A 2 



M-1385 B 



M-1385 D 



M l 386 E 



M-1385 E 







184 MOHENJO-DARO 1387-1390 TABLETS in bas-relief Q 


M-1388 A 


M-1388 B 


M-1389 A 


M-1389 B 












□ TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO 1391-1392 185 




M-im A 


M-1391 B 


M-1392 A 


M'1392 B 


M-1391 A bis 








186 


MOHENJO-DARO 1393-1395 TABLETS in bas-relief 






M-1394 A 


M-1395 A 


M-I395 A bis 


M-I395 B 


M-1393 A 


M-l 394 A bis 


i 

M 1393 D 


M4393 A ter 


M4393 i 


M4393 A bis 


M-1393 B 


M-I394 i 


M-3395 A ler 


M-I395 B bis 

















animals | 1 TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO1396-1400 


187 



M-1397 A 


M-13% A 



M-1396 B 



M-1396 E M-1398 B 



M-1397 B 



M -1398 A 



M-1399 A 



M-1399 B 






M-1400 A 


M-1400 A bis 



M -1400 E 



M-1400 E bis 


M-1400 B 1-2 







i&8 


MOHENJO-DARQ 14QIT404 


TABLETS in bas-relief 


□ 


animals, anthropomarph 



M-1401 A bii 



M-1402 E 


i 

M-1401 F 



M-1401 B 



M-1401 C 



M4401 A 




M-I404 a 


M 1404 B 













anthropomorpK cull obj. □ TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO 1405-1408 189 




M44G6 A 


M-140S B bis 


M-1405 A 


M-I4Q3 B 




M 1406 B 



M L406 B ter 




M 1406 C 




M-I40S B 


M-I40S C 










190 MOHENJO-DARO 1409-1417 TABLETS in bas-relief □ geometrical designs 






M-1409 A 

M-1409 C 


M 1410 A 


M-1412 B 


M-1411 B 


M-1410 B 


M 1412 A 





M-1417 B M-1417D 














geom. designs, no icon. □ TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO 1418-1421 191 



M-1418 B 



M-1418 (1) B 


M 1420 A 



M 1420 B 




M -1418 (2) B 



M-1420 A bis 



M-1420 B bis 



M-1419 A 



M-1419 B 



M-1421 B 





192 MOHENJODARO 1422-1424 TABLETS in bas-relief □ no icon., copper Cj 







M-1424 A 


M-1424 A bis 


M-1424 B 


M-1424 B bis 


M-1422 A 


M-1422 B 


M-1422 C 


M -1422 D 


M-1423 A 


M-1423 B 






£3 CD CXI n > TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO1425-1428 193 






M-1427 B 



M-1427 C 


P 

M-1427 D 



M-1428 C 


M-1428 C bis 












194 


MORENJO-DARO1429-1430 TABLETS in bas-relief £3 C3> 



M-14# a 


M 1430 A 



M -14 29 B 




M-I429 C 




M-1430 c 



M 1430 A lei 



M443Q B his 


M-143D C bis 





M-1430 cc 


M-1430 aa 




M-1430 bh 


B 

M 4430 D 











[=8 H TABLETS in bas-relief MOHENJO-DARO1431-1432 195 




M-1431 A 


M-1411 B 


M 1431 A bit M-1431 B bis 







M-1432 A 


M 1432 i 


M-143! C bit 


« 

M-1431 F 


M-1432 B 


M-1432 b 


M-1432 C 


M- 1432 c 




M 1432 D 



M-1432 F 




M -1432 (1 


M-H32 e 


M-1432 f 











M-1433 E 


M-1433 e 



M-1433 B 


M-1433 b 




M-1434 C 


M-1434 A 


M-1434 E 


M-1433 C 


M -1433 c 


M-1433 F 


M-1433 f 



M-1434 F M-1434 B M-1434 D 








I I TABLETS incised MOHENJO-DARO 1435-1438 197 


o □ 


M-1435 A (100 *) 




M-1436 A (100 *) 


M-1435 B (50*) 



M-1438 A bis 


M-1438 E 


M-1438 • 






198 MOHENJO-DARO 1439-1447 TABLETS incised □ no iconography; broken 


M-I439 A 


M-I44I A 



M-144! a 



M-1439 C 


mm » 

M-1439 B M 1439 D 



M-1442 A 


M-1442 a 



M1440 A 


M-1443 A 



M 1443 a 







M-1444 i M-1444 b M-1445 a 











deer, composite animal _| TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1448-1453 199 







M-1448 A 


M 1*148 R 


M-1449 A 


M-1450 A 


M-1453 A 


M-1449 B 


M 1452 A 


M-1450 B 


M-1451 A 


p-mi 




r‘f w ; 


'>• 

• 'M** 


% 


'- . - 


M-1451 B 


M-1452 B 


M-1453 B 













□ 


comp, an.; geom. design 


M-1456 A 


M-1459 A 


M-1459 B 


MOHENJO-DARO 1454-1459 


M-1454 A 


M-1454 B 


M-1457 A 


M-1457 B 


TABLETS incised , copper 


M-1455 A 


M-1455 B 


M-I458 A 


M 1458 B 


200 















no iconography F^| TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJQ-DARO 1460-1464 201 



M-1460 B 



M-1462 A 



M 1460 A bis 



M-1460 B bis 



M-I4M A 



M-1461 A 


mm 



’. -r 

dl 

' \ . r": 

• 


js?>. 


J j 

M-1461 B 



M -14M A 



M-1462 B 


M 1463 B 


M-1464B 









202 MOHENJO-DARQ 1465-1470 TABLETS incised, copper \ _j no icon.; indistinct [~ I 




M-3465 A 


M -1465 B 



M-1467 A 


M-1466 A 






M-147Q B 











•unicorn'; buffalo □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1471-1474 203 



M-1472 A 



M-1473 A 



MI474 A 



M1472 B 



M-1473 B 



M ■ 1474 B 









204 MOHENJO-DARO1475-1476 TABLETS incised, copper □ buffalo 




M-1475 B 


M-1475 A 


M-1475 A his 



M-1476 A 



M-1475 B his 


M-1476 n 





M-1476 A bis 


M-1476 B bis 













buffalo □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO1477-1479 205 



M4477 A bis 



M-1477 B bis 



M 1478. B 



M-H77 A 


M-H77 B 




M-1478 A 




M4470 A 


M-1479 B 









206 MOHENJO-DARQ 1480 - 1481 TABLETS incised ,, copper □ buffalo; rhinoceros 






M-NSO B 


M-1480 B bis 


M 14H] B 


M-1480 A 


M-1480 A bis 


M-14S1 A 


M'1481 A bis 


M-1481 B bis 








elephant □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJODARO14S2-1485 207 






M-14S3 A 


M-1484 A 


M -14S2 A 


M-1483 B 


M-1484 B 


M-1485 A 


M-1485 B 









208 MOHENJO-DARO 1486-1487 TABLETS incised, copper □ elephant 



M-1486 A 



M-1486 B 



M-1486 A bis 



M-1486 B bis 


M 1487 A 


M-1487 B 





M 1487 A bis 


M-1487 B bis 












elephant | 1 TABLETS incised. 


M-1488 A 


M-1489 A 


M-1490 A 


209 


copper MOHENJO-DARO1488-1490 


M-1488 B 


M-1489 B 


M-1489 B bi* 




210 MOHENJO-DARO1491-1493 TABLETS incised, copper □ hare 




M-1491 A 


M-1491 B 




M-1492 A 


M-1492 B 



M-1492 A bis 




M 1492 B bis 



M-1493 A 


M-1493 B 






hare; comp, animat! □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1494-1497 211 



M-H94 A 



M-1494 B 



M 1495 A 




M-1496 A 



M-14W B 




M-1497 A 


M-1497 B 












212 MOHENJO-DARO 1498-1500 TABLETS incised, copper [~| composite animat 1 






M -1498 B 


M-1498 B bis 


M-1499 B 


M-1498 A 


M-1498 A bis 


M 1499 A 


M-1500 A 


M-1500 B 












composite animal 1, II □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1501-1503 213 





M-1501 B bis 


M-1502 B 


M-1503 B 









214 MOHENJODARO 1504-1507 TABLETS incised, copper □ composite animal 11 



M-1504 A 



M-1504 B 




M-1505 A 


M-1505 B 




M-1506 B 


M-1506 A 







composite animal II □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO1508-1510 215 



M-1508 A 



M-1508 A bis 




M -1508 B 


M-1508 B bis 



M 1509B 




M-1510 A 


M 1510 B 



















216 MOHENJO-DARO 1511-1514 TABLETS incised, copper | | composite animal II 












composite animal III □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1515-1518 217 





7 ' //*'• . 


M-1317B 


M-1515 A 


M-1516 A 


M-1515 B 


M-1516 B 


M-1518 A 


M-1518 B 















218 MOHENJO-DARO1519-1520 TABLETS incised f copper □ composite animal IV, V 






M-1519 A 


M-1519 H 


M-1519 A bu 


M 1519 B bis 


M-I520 A 


M-l 520 B 


M-1520 A bis 


M-1520 B bis 







M-1523 A 



M-I521 B 



M-I522 (1) A M1522 (2) A 



composite animal V □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO1521-1524 219 


M-1521 A 


M-1521 B 



M-I522 (2) B 


M-1522 (l> B 




M 1524 A 


M-1524 B 














220 MOHENJQ DARO 1525-1528 TABLETS incised, copper □ composite animal V f VI 




M 1525 A 


M 1525 B 


M 1526 A 



M 1526 B 



M-1527 A 


M -1528 A 


M-152B B 






M 1521 fl bU 






composite animal VI | I TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1529-1530 221 





M4529 Ato 


M4530 A 




M l529 B his 




M 1530 B 




M-I530 A bis 


M 1530 B bis 













222 MOHENJO-DARO 1531-1534 TABLETS incised, copper □ composite animal VI 






M-1531 A 


M-1532 A 


M-1533 A 


M-1531 B 


M-1532 B 


M-1533 B 


M 1534 A 


M 1534 B 









archer □ TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO1535 1536 223 


M-1535 A 



M-I535 B 




M-1536 B bis 







224 MOHENJO-DARO1537-1539 TABLETS incised, copper □ archer 





M-1537 A 


M-1538 A 


M-1539 A 


M1538 B 


M-1539 B 





archer; indistinct | | TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 1540-1542 225 





M-1540 B 


M-1542 B 


M 1541 B 


M-1541 A 


M-1542 A 


M -1540 A 
















] geom.; no icon. 


226 MOHENJO-DARO1543-1547 TABLETS inc., c. □ indistinct [ 




M-1547 A 


M-1547 B 









no iconography [ 


] TABLETS incised, copper 



M-I548 A 


M -1549 A 




MOHENJODARO1548-1554 111 


M-LS50 A 



M-1548 B 


M-154? B 



M-IS50 B 




M-1551 A 




M'i55l H 




M 1553 A 



M-1553 B 


M-1554 B 












228 MOHENJO-DARO 1555-1560 TABLETS incised, copper | " 1 no iconography 



M-I555 B 



M4557 A 



M-1557 B 



M 1559 A 



M-IS59 B 



M-1556 A 



M 1556 B 



M455& A 




M 1560 A 



M l 560 B 











no iconography [ | TABLETS incised, copper MOHENJO-DARO 156El568 229 



M-15S1 A 


M 1561 B 



M 1562 B M-i5fi3 B 






M1564 A 


M-1565 A 


M-I566 A 



M0567 B 


M 1568 B 








230 MOHENJO-DARO 1569-1575 TABLETS incised, Conner \ I GRAFFITI on pottery, rim 



M-1571 A 






M-l 570 aI 

m 

M-1570 B 


M-1573 A 


M-1571 B 


M-1574 A 


M-1569 A 


M-1569 B 



M-1572 A 




M-1575 A 







GRAFFITI on pottery, rim MOHENJO-DARO 1576-1578 231 



M-1576 A 



M-1577 A 



M-1578 A (100 %) 





232 MOHENJO-DARO 1579-1587 GRAFFITI on pottery, rim 




M-1S80 A (50 %) 


M 1581 A (100%) 


M-1579 A (100%) 


M-1582 A (100 %) 


M 1583 E (100%) 


M 1586 A (50 %) 


M-1586 E (50 %) 


M-1582 A+E (100 %) 













GRAFFITI on pottery, rim: base MOHENJO-DARO 1588-1593 233 




M-1S91 A (50 ft) 


M45S9 A (SO %} 


M-l 5U A <50 %) 


^ 1 * 


M4590 A (50 %> 


M-mi A (100^) 








234 MOHENJO-DARO 1594-1596 GRAFFITI on pottery, base; body 








GRAFFITI on pottery, body MOHENJO-DARO 1597-1599 235 



M-1597 A (1) (50 %) 



M-1597 A (2) (100 %) 



M-1598 A 1 (50 %) 


M-1598 A 3 (50 %) 



M 1598 A 3 bis (50 %) 











236 MOHENJO-DARO1600-1601 


GRAFFITI on pottery, body 




M-1600 A (1) (15 %> 


M 1600 A m (100 


M-1601 A {100 %) 








GRAFFITI on pottery, body MOHENJO-DARO1602-1611 237 



M 1610 A (100 %) 






238 MOHENJO-DARO 1612-1618 GRAFFITI on paver?, body 



M-ieis a (so %y 








GRAFFITI on pottery, body MOHENJO-DARO 1619-1625 239 




M-1619 A (100 %) 


M-1620 A (50 %) 


M-1621 A (SO %) 


M-1625 A bis (100 %) 








240 MOHENJO-DARO 1626-1627 GRAFFITI on pottery , moulded 



M-1626 A (1) (25 %) 


M-1626 B (1) (25 %) 





M-1627 A (50 %) 




M-1626 A (2) (100 %) 



M-1626 B (2) (100 %) 









STONEWARE BANGLES MOHENJO-DARO1628-1629 241 



M -1629 A (2) bis (400 %) 











242 MOHENJO-DARO1630-1632 STONEWARE BANGLES 




M-1630 A (2) (400 %) 




M-1631 A (2) (400 %) 


M-1631 A (1) (200 %) 


M-1632 A (1) (200 %) 


M-1632 A (2) (400 %) 





STONEWARE BANGLES 


MOHENJO-DARO1633-1654 243 





M-1634 A ( 2 ) bis {400 %> 






244 MOHENJO-DARO 1635-1638 STONEWARE BANGLES 










STONEWARE BANGLES 


MOHENJO-DARO1639-1640 245 



M-I639 


( 400 %) 


M-lMti A { 2 } <400 %) 





246 


MOHENJO-DARO 1641-1644 STONEWARE BANGLES 



M LM4 A (I) (200 %) 








STONEWARE BANGLES: MISCELLANEA shell objects MOHENJO-DARO 1645-1648 247 




M-1646 A (2) (400 %) 











ktii 


248 MOHENJO-DARO 1649-1650 MISCELLANEA terracotta cone; ivory sticks 



M-1649 F 


M-1649 A 2 



M-1649 A 3 




M-1650 A 



M-1650 A bis (100 %) 








MISCELLANEA ivory sticks MOHENJO-DARO 1651-1652 249 



M-1651 A 1 



M-1651 A 2 



M 1651 A 3 



M-1651 F 



M-1651 a 


•I 



M-1652 A 




M-1652 C 



M-1652 B 


M-1652 D 


M-1652 F 


M-1652 E 






250 MOHENJO-DARO 1653-1654 


MISCELLANEA ivory plaque; ivory cube 





M-1653 A 


M-1654 F 


ML654 A 


M-1653 C 


M-1654 C 


M-1654 B 


M-1654 E 


M-1654 D 








MlSCELLANEA faience ornament; steatite ornament MO MEN JO-DARO 1655-1656 25 1 



M-1656 B 







252 MOHENJO-DARO 1657-1658 MISCELLANEA steatite ornament; etched bead 




M 1658 A 


M 1658 A bis 


M-1657 B 


M 1658 B 


M l 658 B bis 


.» i 

M-1658 F M-1658 D 


M-1657 C 


M -1657 E 


M-1657 F 









■unicorn-1 (S]J SEALS HARAPPA 266-267 


253 




Harappa 


H-266 A 


H-266 a 


H-267 a 














254 


HARAPPA 268-269 SEALS [fflj] 


unicorn 1 i 



A 


H-269 « 


H-26X » 






'unicorn'I fffjf ] SEALS HARAPPA 270 


255 



H-270 a 











256 


'unicorn '/ 


HARAPPA 271-273 SEALS @ 



H-272 A 



H 272 * 










H-275 (2) B 


H-275 t1> B 


H-275 A 


H-275 (2) A 


‘unicorn l |3fl SEALS HARAPPA 274-275 257 


H-275 (DA 











258 


HARAPPA 356*. 383 SEALS (©]] 


unicorn ' I, II 




H-356* A 


H-383 A 


H-383 (1) A 


H-383 (2) A 


H-356* a 


H-383 (2) a 


H 383 (1) > 


H-383 a 






* unicorn II (tfsjj SEALS HARAPPA 384-386 


259 





H-3S4 A 


H'3S4 a 


H-385 A 


H-385 a 


H 386 A 


H-386 a 












260 


HARAPPA 387-389 SEALS 


'un/cora' H 





H-187 > 


H 38S A 


nm A 


H 3 89 a 

















II 'WO A 


SEALS HARAPPA 390-391 261 


H-390U) » 


" unicorn 1 II 


H-390 (1) A 


H-39I A 


H'39l a 























262 HARAPPA 392-394 SEALS (©]] 


r unicorn' H 


H-393 * 


H 392 (1) A 


H-392 (2) A 


I 

* 




H-394 A 


H-394 » 


\\ m A his 


H-394 B 







unicorn U |gj] SEALS HARAPPA 395-397 


263 



H-395 » 


H-395 A 


H -m i 


um A 


H^97 (1) A 


B497 (2) A 


K-397 (3) A 


H-397 C3+4) A 


H-397 (4) A 



p 

i - 






A 


H-397 <5) A 









264 


HARAPPA 398-400 SEALS [®j] ■unicorn'II 





H-398 A 


H-398 . 


H-399 A 


H-399 • 


H-400 i 


H-400 A 












’ unicorn' II 


|5aj] SEALS HARAPPA 401-404 


265 







H-403 A 



H-403 » 




H-404 A 




H-404 • 



266 


HARAPPA 405-407 SEALS [®J] ’unicorn'III 



H-405 A 


H405 i 












unicorn* /// 


[S[] SEALS HARAPPA 408^t10 


267 




H-40& ibis 




H409 A 



H410 A 


H410 a 









268 


HARAPPA 4! 1-412 SEALS @j 


unicorn 111 



H411 A 


H-4I1 J 



H412 i 


H412 A 



H4L2 A bis 


H-412 i bis 





•unicorn-III @ SEALS HARAPPA 413-416 


im 



JM15 ■ 


H415 A 


H415 A bii 


H-416 A 


H4I6 « 













270 


HARAPPA 417-419 SEALS @J 'unicorn'til 




H-417 A 


H417 i 




H4|?A 


H-419 A bis 


H-4J9 a bu 








unicorn HI jSJJ SEALS HARAPPA 420-422 


271 



H42G A 


H-42D * 



H421 A 


H421 * 



H422 A 



H422 A bis 



H422 & 




272 


HARAPPA 423-425 SEALS @ 


'unicorn HI 



H-423 A 


H-424 a 


H424 A 


H423 A bis 


H-424 A bis 


H425 A 


H425 j 








micorn'tll @] SEALS HARAPPA 426-433 


213 




H431 m 


H433 a 












274 


HARAPPA 434-441 SEALS @] “ unicorn III, IV 



H436 A 







H439 A 


H44I A 



H440 A 




H440 E 



H-441 i 


H44(5 i 





















RARAPPA 442-446 275 


H-W3 A 


H-443 A bU 


H^43 B 


H -44* A 


H44* a 


' unicorn' IV |$gj] SEALS 


H-444 A 


H444 a 


H-445 a 


H -445 A 


H-445 A bis 











276 


HARAPPA 447^51 SEALS ||(] 'unicorn IV 





H^47 A 


i 


H^449 A 


H-447 « bii 


H-448 4 


H447 A bis 


MA51 A 


H450 A 


H44 9 a 


H^SO a 


H-451 a 

















'unicorn W @ SEALS HARAPPA 452^55 


211 






FM52 A 


H-452 A tcx 


H-454 A 


H 455 A Ms 


H452 a 


H452 A bis 


H453 A 


H453 * 


H-454 a 


H455m 


*M55 ft Ms 











278 


HARAPPA 456-461 SEALS @] 'unicorn' IV 



H456 A 


H 457 A 


H^58 A 



hM57 a 


H-458 a 



H—4-60 A 


H-461 A 


H456 a 


H459 A 



H 459 a 


11-460 a 


H-46I a 










'unicorn' IV @] SEALS HARAPPA 462-466 


279 



H-462 A 



H463 A 


H464 A 






H464 a 


tM62 t bis 


H4G6 A 


H-«ft A bis 



H-465 A 



H46* a 


H466 a bis 









280 


HARAPPA 467-471 SEALS @ 'unicorn' [V 



H-468 A 



H4$8 a 



H470 A 


H 470 A bis 



H-471 a 






U470 i 


H-47J a 











‘unicorn IV |Sj] SEALS HARAPPA 472-477 281 



H-473 a H-474 a 



H-475 A 



H-475 a 



H-476 A 




H-477 A 



H-476 a 
















282 


HARAPPA 478-485 SEALS [®j] ’unicorn’ IV 





H-481 A 


H-478 A 


H-478 a 


H-480 a 


H-484 A 


H-484 (l) A 


H-484 a 


H485 A 


H-481 a 


H-483 a 


H-485 a 









' unicorn ’ IV (ggjj SEALS HMAP PA 486-490 283 




H-436 a 



H-459 B 


fMSS a 







H-4S9 t 


JM90 A bis 


H-490 a 















H 495 i 


H497 i 



















'unicorn* V @ SEALS HAHAPPA 499-507 


285 





H-504 A 


H 504 i 


H-505 A 


HS01 A 


H 502 a 


H-503 A 


H 503 ti 


H^99 A 


H499i 


H 500 > 


H-501 A 


N 501 a 


H-50& A 


H-506 a 


H-507 A 


H-5Q7 i 














236 


HARAPPA 508-515 SEALS jSJj ’unicorn’ V 






H 5m A 


H-510 A 


H-508 a 


H-510 i 


H-509 A 


HS1] A 


H 514 a 


H-509 i 


H-Sll a 


H-512 a 


H-510 A bl* 


H-512 A 


H -515 A 


H-513 , 


H-514 A 


H-515 A 


H 515 a 


H -514 A h te 
















'unicorn' V ®] SEALS HARAPPA 516-523 


287 



H-522 A H-522 b 



K-523 A 


H-523 A bis 


H-523 b 







288 


HARAPPA 524-532 SEALS 'unicorn' V, VI; broken, bovid! 



smMQ WES& IMP 

H-527 A K-52A A H . 5l8 4 



K-529 A 



H-532 t 




















broken, bovid l t ft ys 


SEALS HARAPPA 533-536 


289 




H 533 A bis 


H-533 A 


H-533 > 




H-S34 A 



nm m A 


H-533 * bis 




H-534 (2> i 


H'534 (2) A bis 



H-535 A 












290 


HARAPPA 537-543 SEALS 


|5j] broken, hovid II, lit, IV 



H-5M A 



K-539 A 


H-539 a 



H-S40 A 



H-54G ■ 



H*54! A 



H-S.4I a 


If 

H542 A 



H-543 A 



H-543 . 









broken, bovid fV. V t Vf jSj] SEALS HARAPPA 544-557 291 



H-545 A 


H-544 a 


H-547 A 


H 54* A 


H-546 A 


H 546* 


H 549 A 


K-550 A 


H 551 A his 


H-551 A 


H-550 i 


H 554 A 


H'555 A 


H-553 A 


H-556 B H-556 D 


H 552 A H-552 i H-556 A 


H-557 A 















292 


HARAPPA 558-565 SEALS @ broken, no motif extant l, ill, IV 



H-562 a 



H-563 A «Ml fl 



H-563 a 



H 564 A 



H-565 A 









broken, no motif extant 1, III, V, VI QJ] SEALS HARAPPA 566-575 293 





P 

H-575 A 


H-573 B-hC+D 


H 573 A 


H-568 A 


• 9 

K-570 A H-570 a 


H-57J B+C+D 


w ^ 

A H-572 « 


' 

H-572 B 


H-572 a bii 


H-574 A 




H 574 B+C+F 


H-574 h 


r 








294 


HARAPPA 576-584 SEALS [SjJ 


bison 


m r 




H-579 A 


H-57& A bis 


H-580a 


H-579 a 


H-5BQ A 
















*mr. 


zebu, bitffafo, elephant [©_ 


SEALS HARAPFA 585-590 295 













296 


HARAPPA 591-595 SEALS [Sj] elephant, tiger ■„ composite animal 



H-591 A bis 


H-592A 


H 591 A ter 


H-592* 


H-594 A 


H-593 A 


H 594 A bis 


H-595 A 


H-595 A his 


H-594 A ler 


H 595 a bis 


H-595 i 




















n-mA 


no iconography 


H-5% * 


‘unicorn 


H-596 i feii 


H-507 ■ 


SEALS HARAPPA 596-598 


297 I 


H'397 A 


H -m B 


H-59Se 


H-59S A 


w ► 

H-596 B H-596 D 


H591 C 


H-597 c 













298 


HARAPPA 599 601 SEALS 







H-599 C 


H 599 B 


H-599 A 


H-599 * 


H-599 E 


H-600 A 


H-600 a 


4 

H-600 F 


H-599 d 


H-600 D 

















'unicorn* ; jjf g] SEALS HARAPPA 602-605 299 



H-602 A 



H 602 A bis 



H-602 B 




H-602 a 



H 604 B 


H 604 A 


H-604 D 


H-605 A 






300 


HARAPPA 606-609 


SEALS O T "1 



ti.*0G A 




H-607 A 


3 

H407 B+D 




H-60S A 



H 606 B 



H 6QB A bis 




I 

H 608 D 


H-60S e 


H-6Q8 C 



H-60« F H-6DA B 





H 609 F 















'unicorn' " J- QJ SEALS HARAPPA 610-612 301 



H 611 E 









302 


HARAPPA 613-619 SEALS 



H 613 B H-613 D 














SEALS HARAPPA 620-629 303 




H422 A 




H-t24 i 






H-625 a 


H 626 A 



H-626 B 

H-626 a. 



H-623 B 



H-623 A 




H ‘627 A 


H-627 a 














304 


HARAPPA 630-638 SEALS 



























no iconography l, II SEALS HARAPPA 639-642 305 







Wsm 


H-Ml E 


H-642 C 


n-m A 


H-639 a 


t/m 

JJ-640 C 

S-tBBSE 

H 640 £ 


H 642 A 


H-641 A 


H-641 a 


H-640 A 


H 642 a 


















306 


HARAPPA 643-645 SEALS no iconography III 



H-643 C 


¥ 


Ji-644 A 



H 644 E 




H-644 a 



H'645 C 











no iconography III C3 SEALS HARAPPA 646-651 307 





H-64d A H-647 A ^647 C 



H-646 * 


H-647 a 



H-M7E 



H-650 a 


H 651 a 















308 


HARAPPA 652-657 SEALS ^5 ** iconography III 



H-652A H-652E 



H-653 A 



H 652 ■ 



H-653 E 



H-653 i 



H-654 A 





H-655 A H-455 C 



H-6S5 * 



H-654 & 



H-654 a bis 



H-656 A 


ifll 

H-656 F H-M6 B 1> 



H 65? A 



H 656 « 



H-657 C 



H 657 a 








no iconography III, IV SEALS HARAPPA 658-665 309 



H-658 a H-659 a 



H-663 A 


H-663 A bis 


H-664 A 


H-664 A bis 


H-665 A 



H -665 a 


















H 669 A 


H-669 i 


SEALS 


H-671 C 


H-671 F 


H-671 B 


H-671 E 


H-673 A 


H 671 D 


H 673 E 


H-670 A 


H 670 a 


no iconography fV 


H 667 C 

H-667 E 


H-668 C 


H 668 B 


unfinished 


H 668 A 


H-671 A 


H 671 A bia 


310 HARAPPA 666-673 


H-666 A 


H 666 a 




H-667 A 


H-667 a 












unfinished SEALS HARAPPA 674-682 311 



H 674 A 



H 674 C 



H-675 A H-676 A 



H-675 C H-676 E 



H-681 a 


H 682 F 


H-682 C 









312 


HARAPPA 683-688 SEALS unfinished 





m 

H-6S6 B 


u-m A 


H-*S4 C 


H 6S7 A 


0 

H-6S5 B+C+D 


H-6BS D 








(ZZ3 SEALS HARAPPA 688 


313 





H-6SS a 


H 688 F 


H-6SS C 


H-fiSS B 


H-6SS E 







314 


HARAPPA 689 SEALS f=$ 



HM9 A 


H 689 A bis 



H 6*9* 


H 689 b 



H-6S9 B bis 



H 6S9 F 



H 689 E 



H-689 C 


H 689 D 






SEAL IMPRESSIONS; G TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 690-695 315 


H-690 A <50%) 



H-693 A 



H'693 B 



A bb 




H-692 A (2) 






H-m B H 694 D A 




H-692 A {]) <100%) 



H-694 A 














316 


HARAPPA 696-704 


TABLETS in bas-relief L_t animal 



H A H-£96 B 



H-697 A 



H 697 B 


H-698 A 



H-701 A bU 



H-6W A 



H-70G B 




H-70DA 



H-701 B 



H-701 B bis 




H-702 A 


H-702 A Hi 




H-702 B 


H 702 B bis 



H-701 A ui 



H-701 B I a 



H-703 A H-703 B 



H-703 B bis 



H-704 C H-704 A H-704 B 











ghariat I T TABLETS in bas-relief 


HARAPFA 705-710 317 






H-705 A 



H-7G5 B 



H-706 A 



H-705 B bit 


H 705 B ter 





H-710 A 


H-710 B 

















318 


HARAPPA 711-717 TABLETS in bas-relief I I 


gharial; anthropomorph 



















free □ TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 718-723 319 


H-721 3 


H m A 


H-718 A (1) 


H-721 A 


H-7L9 B 


H-719 B bis 


H-718 A (2) 


H-718 C 


H-72G B 


H -718 B 


H -718 E 


H-722 B 


H-722 A 


H-723 A 


H-723 B 














H 729 B 


H 730 A 


320 HARAPPA 724-730 


H 724 A 


H-724 A bis 


TABLETS in bas-relief L—I 


H -724 B 


H-724 B Ms 


H-72G A 


H-726 B 


H-727 A 


H-727 S 


tree 


h-724 B ICT 


H-725 A 


H-723 A 


H-725 B 


H-72S B 


H-729 A 


H 73i) B 








tree; cult object TABLETS in has relief HARAPPA73I-74I 321 







H-73] A 


H-733 E 


H-733 C 


H m A 


H-733 B 


H-732 A 


H-732 R bi* 


H-735 B bis 


H 731 B 


H-732 A bis 


H-732 B 


H-735 B 


H-735 A 


H-735 A bis 






H-739 A K-739 B 



H-740 A 




H-74Q B 


H IM H 


H-741 B bis 

















H-744 A 


H-744 B 


H -745 A 


H-745 B 


322 HARAPPA 742-754 TABLETS in bas-relief □ cult object; geom.; no iconogr. 


0 

H-743 D 


K-743 A 


H-743 B 


H-742 R 


H-742 m B 


K 742 (2J A 


H-750 B H-753 B 


H-751 A 


H-753 A 


H-746 A 


H 746 B 


H-748 A 


H 747 B 


H'749 A 


H-750 A 


H-752 A 


H-754 A 


H-74g B 












no iconography QH TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 755-767 323 



H-755 A 



H-7S6 A 




H-757 A 



H-75S A 


mm 


H-759 A 



h B 



H'760 A 


H B 



H-761 A 



H-762 A 


n-m A 


K-763 B 



H-7H1 B 



H-762 B 



H-764 A 


H-76S A 




H 76fi A 



H-764 B 



H-765 B 



H 766 B H-767 A H-767 B 














324 HARAPPA 768-777 TABLETS in bas-relief | | no iconography 



H-768 A 


H-768 A bis 



H-768 B 



H-769 A 




H-769 B 



H-771 A 



H-771 A ter 



H-771 A quater 



H-772 A 



H-773 A 



H-773 B 




H-772 A ter 



H-774 A 



H-774 B 




H-774 B bis 




H-771 B 


H 776 A 


H-777 A 


H-777 B 


H-776 A bis 


H 776 B 



H-772 B bis H-775 B 



v rV 
















no iconography □ TABLETS in has-relief HARAPPA 778-793 325 




H-778 A 


H-778 B 




H-T79 A 


H-779 B 



H-7B2 B 




H-783 A 


H-783 B 



H'785 A bis 



9BB 

H-786 A 


H 736 B 





H 780 A 


H-780 A bit 




H-787 A 


H-787 A bis 



H-7B7 B 



H 735 B 



H-789 A H-789 R 



K781 B 



H-784 B 



K-788 B 





H m A 


H-m B 



H-m A 



H-793 B 


H-790 B 


H-791 B 





326 HARAPPA 794-806 TABLETS in bas-relief □ no icon.; copper 



H-794 B 


mw 

H-794 E 



H-799 B 



H-795 A 


m a 

H 796 A H 797 A 


H-795 B H 796 B H-797 B 



H-800 B H-H01 B bis 





BUBS 

H 802 A 


H-798 A 


H-798 A bis 


H-798 B 


H-802 B 



H-803 A 



H-803 B 




H-806 A 


H-806 F 


H 806 B 











TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 807-812 327 





1 


H-S09 A 


H-E09 B 



H AW A bis 



►» i®a 

H-812 A HSI2C H-S12B 



H-S11 B bis 








328 HARAPPA 813-824 TABLETS in has relief D O CD T^a 







H-817 A 




H-8IB A 


H-K1S B 



H-8I9 B 



M te 

A ^ „^ 1B -- 


H*824 A 


H-824 B 




H ^ 16 A 


H 816 B 



J-T820 A bii 



H-820 fi 



H-820 H bis 



H 820 B ict 



H-820 E 














329 



H-825 A 


H 825 B 


C TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 825-834 



H-826 A 



H-827 A (l) 


mv '*s® 

H-827 B H-828 A 



H-826 B 



H-827 A (2) 



H-828 B 



H-829 B 




H-831 B bis 



H-831 A 



H 831 A bis 



H-831 B 



H-833 A 


H-833 A bis 


H-833 B 


H-834 B 






330 HARAPPA 835-842 TABLETS in bas-relief Q 




H-838 A 



H-838 A bU 



H 838 B 


H-840 A 



H 840 E 













( D !~h TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 843-848 


331 



H 843 A 



H 844 A H-844 B 




H-846 A 


H 846 B 



H-846 C 



H-847 D 


W6 

H-847 A 



H-847 C 



H-847 C bis 






H-848 A 


H 848 B 


H 848 B bis 










332 HARAPFA 849-856 TABLETS in bas-relief j~~b 


H *52 A hi* 


H-855 A 


H-855 B 


H-855 C 


H-JS52 A 


H 849 A 


H-S50 C bij 


H-850 F H 851 D 


H 856 A 


H 856 B 


H-856 C 



















/ & ( O TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 857-862 


333 




H S57 A 


H 857 B 



H-839 A 




H-858 A bis 



K-859 B 




HUfil A 



H-M B 



H-862 A 


H'862 B 







334 HARAPPA 863-868 TABLETS in bas-relief C~D 





H 863 A 


H 863 B 




H 868 A 


H 868 B 












CD TABLETS in bas-relief HARAPPA 869-874 


335 













336 HARAPPA 875-885 TABLETS in bas-relief (~~Q TABLETS incised □ icon. 



H 875 A H-875 E 




H 876 A bis 


**r*wf» 



H-876 E 




H-877 B 





H 875 B 


H 878 A ter 


H 878 B bis 


H-878 A 


H-878 A bis 



H-881 (2) A 



H-879 B 



H 880 B 




H-881 (2) B 



H 885 A 


H-885 (1) A 



H-885 B 



H-885 (1) B 









TABLETS incised HARAPPA 886-898 337 





H 890 ■ 



H-890 b 





H-893 A 

Hfc 

H-893 (1) A 



H 894 A 


H 895 A 







H 893 B 


H-893 (1)B 


H 894 B 


H 895 B 


H -892 A 



H 897 A 


H-897 B 


H 898 A 


H-898 A bis 









338 HARAPPA 899-911 TABLETS incised □ 


no iconography 



H 899 A 


H 899 A bis 



H-899 t 



H-899 B bis 



H-899 b 



H-905 A H-905 B 



H-906 A H-906 B 


# A) 

H 906(1) A H-906 (2) A H-906 a) B H-906 (1) B 



H-907 A H-907 B 



H 900(1) A 



H-900 B 


H-900 (1) B 



H 901 A 


H-902 A 



H 901 B 



H 902 B 



H -908 A 



H 908 B 



H -909 A 




H -910 A 



H-910 B 



H-911 A 


















no iconography I J TABLETS incised HARAPPA 912-926 339 





U-921 A 



H-922 A 



H 923 A 




K-924 A H-924 H 



H-925 A Hm5 3 



H 923 (1) A H-925 (2} A H-925 (2) B H-925 (I) B 



U926A 



H-925 A bis 


H-925 B bis 


H-925 A ter 

















340 HARAPPA 927-942 TABLETS incised 1 1 no iconography 



H-927 A 



H 932 A bis 




H938 A bis 



H 938 B 



H 928 B H-929 B H-930 B 



H-933 A H-934 A H-935 A 



H-933 B H 934 B H . 9 35 B 


H-937 (1+2) A H 93? g) A H 937 (2) B 



H 939 A 


H 940 A 




H-931 A bis 


Si 

H-931 B 


H-936 (1) A 




H 941 A 


H 941 A bis 





H-939 A bis 



H-940 B 



H 941 B 



H-939 B 



H 941 B bis 



H 939 B bis 


H-942 A 



H 942 B 












no iconography I | 


TABLETS incised HARAPPA 943-958 341 



H-943 A 


H-94J A bis 


H 943 B 


H 943 B bis 






H-944 A 



H 949 A 




H-944 B 




H 952 A 



mw M\ 


H-945 B 


H-946 B 



H'947 B 



H-950 A 



H-950 A bis 




H-953 A 



H-950 B bis 


H-954 A 



H-952 B 



H-953 B 



H-954 B 



H-955 B 


H-957 B 















342 HARAPPA 959-973 TABLETS incised CD CJ O CD 



H-959 B H-MO (1) B H-96J A bis 



K-962 A H-%3 A H-964 A 


• % it 

H 962 B H-963 B H-964 B 



H-968 A 



H-967 B 



H-968 B 




H-965 A 

fp 

H-965 A bU 


H 966 A 



H-969 (1+2) A 

m 

H-969 as A 



H-969 USB 


H-970 A 



H 970 B 



H-972 A 



H-972 B 



H-973 A 


<3 O 



H 96! B bis 



H-965 B 

lib 

H-965 B bU 



H-973 B 
















g hartal; fish; geom. 


TABLETS incised HARAPPA 974-984 343 



H-974 A 


H 974 A his 



H-974 B qu mci 


H-974 B qmnquies 



H-974 C 




H-975 B 

«8 

H-975 B bis 



K-975 C ter 









H-977 A 


H-977 B 


K-977 B bis 


H-977 C 


H 977 C bis 


K-978 C 

A ►“ 


C 

H-978 D 


* ► “ 
c 

H-979 D 



H-981 A 

fH 



H-979 B 


H 981 A bis 

-*5 

K-981 (1) A 



H 981 (1> B 



H-984 A 


H-982 A bis H-9&* B 



H-982 C H-983 B to H-9S3 C bis 


H-984 A bis 



H-9S4 B 


H-984 C 













344 HARAPPA 985-991 TABLETS incised 


GRAFFITI on pottery, rim 











H-986 A 


H 986 U) A 


H-9S6 B 


H-9S6 (l> B 


H 986 C 


(I) A+C 


H 987 C 


H'9S5 A 


H-9B5 A bis 


H-9H5 ft 


H-985 B bis 


H-m C 


H-985 € bis 


H-9SH B 


H^aa Q) b 













GRAFFITI on pottery t rim; base HA RAPP A 992-995 3 45 



H-992 A (1) (50 %) 



H-992 A (2) 



H 993 E £50 


n -m A (100 % ) 



H-994 A (100 %) 



W 


ii-995 A £1J 0 


H-995 A (2) (7 %) 








346 HARAPPA 996-1000 GRAFFITI on pottery, body (interior; exterior) 





H-997 A (100%) (interior) 


H-998 A (100%) 


H 996 A (100%) (interior) 


H 999 A (100%) 


H-1000 A (100 %) 

















GRAFFITI on pottery, body (exterior) HARAPPA 1001-1004 347 




H-1001 (1) A (100 %) 


H-1001 (2) A (100 %) 


H-1002 A (100 %) 


H-1001 (1) A bis (100 %) 


H-10W A (100 %) 








348 HARAPPA 1005-1007 GRAFFITI on pottery, body (ext.); moulded (base); painted 




H 1005 A (1) (SO %) 


H-1006 A (100 %) 


H 1005 A (2) (100 %) 


H 1007 A (100%) 










i.c. BANGLE!?): STONEWARE BANGLES: t.c. UD HARAPPA 1008-1011 


349 



H-1010 A 


H 1011 A 


H 1011 A bis 











350 HARAPPA 1012-1017 t.c. CONES; BONE POINTS; IVORY STICK 


H-1017 A (I) 


f/ * * ’ 

H-1017 A (3) 


H-1017 A £5) 


9 

H 1017 D 

& 


JM012 A 


H-I013 F+A 


H-1013 A 


h-ioi:b 


H 1012 E 


H-1014 A (1) (100 


H-1015 A(l) 


H-IDI6 A 


H-1014 A (2) (160 


H-1014 A (3) 000 %} 


H-1015 A (2) (1000 %) 


H-1017 A £2) 


H 1017 A (4) 


H-1017 A (6) 


H-1017 m 


H-1017 F 












COPPER OBJECT incised; BEAD incised HARAPPA IQ18-1QI9 


351 



N 1019 E 


H-1019 D 






352 RAHMAN-DHER1 1-5 (EARLY HARAPPAN) bone SEAL; GRAFFITI on pottery , incised 


Rahman-dheri 



RJid 1 A Rhd'l B 



Rhd-3 A (LOO%) 


RM-S A 1100%) 


Rhd-2 A (100%) 


Rhd-4 A (100%) 








GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHERI6-/3 


353 













354 


RAH MAN-DHERl 14-22 (EARLY HARARE AN) GRAFFITI on pottery t incised 



RM-IS A (100%) 


EM 16 A (100 %) 


Rhd-17 A (1110%) 


Rhd-18 A (100%) 


Rhd-19 A (100%) 


Rhd-2] A (100%) 


Rhd-20 A (50%) 


Rhd 22 A (50%) 








Rhd-24 A (100%) 


Rhd-23 A (100%) 


Rhd-25 A (MQ%) 


Rhd-26 A (100%) 


Rhd-27 A (50%) 


Rhd-28 A (100%) 


Rhd 29 A (100%) 


Rhd^l A (50%) 


Rhd^3 A (50%) 


GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPFAN) RAHMAN-DHERI23-34 355 


Rhd-30 A (50%) 


Rfid-32 A (50%) 


RM-34 A <50%) 


















356 


RAHMAN-DHERl35-42 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 



Rhd-36 A (100%) 


Rhd-37 A (100%) 


Rhd-38 A (50%) 


Rhd-40 A (100%) 


RIkI-41 A (100%) 


Rhd-42 A (100%) 






GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 


I EARLY HARAPPAN) 


357 



Rhd4S A (100%) 


Rhd-50 A (100%) 















358 RAHMAN-DHERl 53-64 


KhcJ-53 A (50%) 


Rhd-56 A (50%) 


{EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery . indsed 


Rbd'57 A (50%) 


Rhd-54 A (50%) 


Rhd 55 A (50%) 


Rhd-6i A (100%) 


Rhd‘63 A (100%) 


Rhd-64 A (50%) 






GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHERI65-77 359 







360 


RAHMAN-DHERI 78-85 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 



Rhd 84 A (100%) 




GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAFPAN) RAHMAN-DHERI86-96 


361 



Rhd-87 A (100%) 


Rhd-86 A (100%) 


Rhd-89 A (100%) 


Rhd 90 A (100%) 


Rhd-93 A (100%) 


Rhd-92 A (100%) 


Rhd-94 A (50%) 


Rhd-95 A (100%) 


Rhd-96 A (100%) 


// 






362 


RAHMAN-DHER! 97-107 (EARLY HARAP PAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 












GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHER1108-118 363 








364 


RAH MAN-DHERI119-129 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 



Rhd-119 A (100%) 


Rhd-120 A (100%) 


Rhd-123 A (50%) 


Rhd-122 A (100%) 


Rhd-125 A (100%) 


Rhd-124 A (100%) 


Rhd-129 A (100%) 


Rhd-127 A (100%) 








GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHERI130-141 365 



Rhd-134 A (100%) 


Rhd-139 A (100%) 


Rhd-136 A (100%) 


Rhd-140 A (100%) 


Rhd-141 A (100%) 










366 


RAHMAN -DHER1142-153 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 



RM-144 A (100%) 


Rhd-145 A (50%) 


Rhd-149 A (100%) 


Rhd-150 A (100%) 


Rhd-152 A (100%) 


RM-m A (100%) 











GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) 


RAHMAN-DHER11S4-165 367 









368 


RAHMAN-DHER1 166-178 (EARLY HARAPPAN) 


GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 


h 


i 



Rhd-167 A (100%) 


Rhd 171 A (100%) 


Rhd-169 A (100%) 


Rhd-172 A (100%) 


Rhd 175 A (100%) 


Rhd-174 A (50%) 


Rhd-176 A (50%) 







GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHERl 179-189 369 



Rhd-189 A (50 *) 











370 RAHMAN-DHERJ 190-199 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, inched 



Rhd-196 A {m %) 


Rhd 199 A aW %) 







GRAFFITI on pottery, incised (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHERl 200-210 371 


RM-203 A (SO %) 


s' #■ ! 

affi-Mtttf 


Rhd-2P7 A (100 %) 


Rhrf-209 A (50 %> 


Rhd-210 A am %) 













372 RAHMANDHER1 211-221 (EARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery, incised 



Rhd-212 A {100 %) 


Rhd-211 A [50 %> 


Rhd'2L3 A {100 %) 


Rhd-215 A(SO%) 


Rhd-214 A (50 %) 


Khd 216 A Cl (HI %] 


Rhd-218 A (100 %) 


Rhd-217 A (100 %) 


Rhd-221 A(IOG^) 


Rhd-219 A (100 %} 


Rhd-220 A UOO %) 




GRAFFITI, incised + painted (EARLY HARAPPAN) RAHMAN-DHER! 222-231 


373 








374 RAHMAN-DHER/ 232-242 


(EARLY HARARE AN) GRAF FITI on pottery* painted 



Rhd-234 a (ion 


Rlid-232 A (50 %) 


MuJ-233 A (50 %} 


Rh&m A (100 %) 


Rtid-238 A (50 %) 


Rhd-237 A (100 *>) 


Rhd-m A (100 %) 


RM-240 A (100 *) 


Rhd-241 A (100%) 





GRAFFITI on pottery, painted (EARLY HARAFPAN) RAHMAN-DHER! 243-249 375 







376 RAHMAN-DNERl 250-254 iEARLY HARAPPAN) GRAFFITI on pottery , painted 



Khid 251 A (100 %) 


Rhd-252 A (100 %) 







RAHMAN-DHERI 255-260 377 


GRAFFITI on pottery, painted (EARLY HARAPFANj 






378 RAHMAN-DHER! 261-269 (EARLY HARAFFAN) GRAFFITI . painted; SCRAPERS (?) 






Rhd-267 A (50 %) 


RM-26S A 150 %) 


^1164 AUOO %) 


RW 266 A (100 %) 


Rhd-263 A (50 %) 


RM-262 A (K30 %) 


▼ 

Rhd-265 A (50%) 


Rhd-267 B (50 %) 


KM-269 B (100 %) 






SEALS MATURE HARAPPAN + POST-HARAPPAN: Period l A PIRAK 1-3 


379 


Mature Harappan (Surface finds) 



Pit-1 A 



Pirak 



Pk-2 (2) A 


Post-Harappan (100%): 
Period I A 



FV3 A Pk-3 B 






























380 PIRAK 4-12 


Pk-4 A 


Pk-4 B 


Pk-4 E 


Pk-9 A 


Pk-9 B 


Pk-4 D 


Pk-8 A 


Pk-12 A 

► 

Pk -12 D 


Pk 10 B 

Pk-lOE 


Pk-11 E 


Pk-8 B 


Pk-8 E 


Pk-11 A 


POST-HARAPPAN: Period IA SEALS (100 %) 


Pk-7 B 


Pk-7 D 


Pk-7 C 


Pk 5 A 


Pk-6 A 


Pk 6 B 


Pk-6 D 


Pk-9 E 






Period I B 






Pk-i4 E 





Pk-20 A 


Pk-20 B 


Pk-21 E 








382 


PIRAK 22-26 


POST-HARAPPAN: Period IB - II SEALS (100 %) 




Pk-22E 



Pis 24 A 



Pk 25 B 



n-25 C 


Period II 




Pk-26 C 


Jr & 

p k-2& F Pk-26 B p k _26 D 



Pfc-26 A (200%) 







SEAI£ (100%) POST-IIARAPFAN: Period // 


PIRAK 27*33 


383 




Pk-27 A 


Pk -29 A 


Pfc -29 E 


Pk-30 E 


Pk-33 F 


Pk 3] A 


Fk 32 A 


Pk-32 C 


Pk AO A 


Pk-27 B 


Pk 2a c 


Pk-31 F 


Pk-3J A 







384 P1RAK 34-40 POST-HARAPPAN: Period II SEALS (100%) 






Pk-34 A 


Pk-34 D 


Pk-35 A 


Pk-35 B 




Pk 37 F 


Pk 37 A 


Pk-36 A 


Pk 38 A 


Pk-39 A 


Pk 36 C 


Pk 38 D 


Pk 39 D 


Pk40C 


Pk-40 A 


Pk-40 F 





PIRAK4M6 


385 


SEALS (100%) POSTHARAPPAN: PeriodU - /// A 



Pk-15 A 


Pit-45 C 


Pk-46 B 


Pk46 A 







386 PIRAK 47-49 POSJ-HARAPPAN: Period III B SEALS (100%) 





Pk-47 F 


Pk 48 A 


Pk-48 B 


Period ID B 


Pk-47 E 


Pk-47 A 


Pk-49 A 


Pk-49 B 


Pk-49 D 






' unicorn* 


SEALS ALLAHDINO 1-5 


387 


Allahdino (Nel Bazaar) 




Ad-2 A 


Ad-2. 



Ad-3 A 


Ad-4 A 


Ad-5 A 













388 ALLAHDINO 6 11 SEALS 


GRAFFITI on pottery; /.c. FIGURINE 





Ad ll E 


Ad II B 


0 

Ad-11 F 


Ad-10 A (100%) 


Ad-6 A 


Ad-9 A (100%) 


Ad 11 D 


Ad-7 A 


Ad-7 B Ad-7 D 


Ad II A 










GRAFFITI on pottery 


PRE-HARAPPAN AMR/ 3-5 


389 


Amri 


Pre-Harappan: Period I B 




Ai-3 A (50 %) 


Ai4 A (100*) 



Ai-5 A (100 %) 









390 AMRI6-8 MATURE HAftAPPAN + LATE HARAPPAN 


Mature Harappan: Period III C 




Ai-6 B 




Ai-6 A 


Ai-6 e 



Ai 7 B [25 


Ai-7 A [50 %) 


Late Harappan: 
Period III D 



Ai 8 A 







39 L 


'unicorn *, urus 


SEALS BALA-KOT1-5 


Bala-kot 



BLk-3 a 


31k 1 A 



Blk-2 A 


Blit 4 A 



Blk'5 A 



B31c-5 B 


!» 

Blk-5 D 


Blk'5 E 













392 BALA-KOT 6 GHARO BHIRO 1 GUMLA I EARLY HARAPPAN 



Blk-fi E 


Gharo Bhiro (Nuhato) 



Grh'l 


Gum la 

Early Harappan: 
Period II 



G-l A (1D0%) 






EARLY HARAPPAN + MATURE HARAPPAN GUMLA2S 


393 





Period IH 


Mature Harappan: 
Period IV A 


Period IV B 


G'6 A m 


G-2 A (100 %> 


G-J A 150 %) 


G-4 A (50 


G*5 A (50 %) 


G-7 A (50 %) 


G-8 A (50 %) 




MATURE HARAPPAN 


394 GUMLA 9-16 

Period IV C 


Period IV D 



GU A 



G9 A (50 


G-IO A (50 56} 



G 12 A (50 %) 


G-I3 A (50 


Period IV pottery from Period V contexts 



G 14 A (50 


C 15 A (50 %) 


G 16 A (50 





GRAFFITI on pottery t incised 


(MATURE HARAPPAN) 


HISSAM-DHERI 1-7 395 


Hissam-dheri (Mature Harappan) 



Hd? A (100 %) 


Hd-fi A {100 %} 






396 JHUKAR3 


KALAKO-DERAY I 


K0T-DIJ1 1-2 


Jhukar (LateHarappan) 




Ik-3 B (50 %) 



IkJ A (100%) Jk'3 E (50 %) 


Kalako-deray (Post-Harappan) 



KM A 


Kot-Diji 

Early Harappan 










EARLY HARAPPAN -f MATURE HARAPPAN KOT-DUl 3-7 397 





Kd-t A (50 %} 


Kd-6 C 


Kd-6 F ft 


Mature Harappan 


Kd-3 A (100 %) 


Kd 6 A 


Kd-5 B 


Kd-5 a 






398 KOT DIJ18-11 MATURE HARAPPAN GRAFFITI on pottery 




Kd-ll A (100%) 


Kd-10 A (100 %) 


Kd-8 A+E (70 %) 


Kd 9 A (50 %) 


Kd-9 A(2) (100%) 








MATURE HARAPPAN + Period? KOI 011112-15 399 




Kd-12 A+E (100 %) 


Kd-12 A 


Kd44A(l00%) 


Kd-H A+E (SO %) 


Kd-13 A (J00 %) 


Kd H A+E (SO 


Period ? 




Kd-15 A (50 %} 


Kd 15 B (50 %) 






400 KOT-DUt 16-17 LEWAN l 




Kd-17 A (100 %> 



Levvan-dheri (Dar Dariz) 

(Early Harappan) 


Lwn l A 1-2 


2 










LOEBANR Iff1 MEHRGARH 1 -4 



LIU-1 A(5Q%) 


401 

Loebanr III 

(Post-Harappan) 


Mehrgarh 


Pre-Harappan: 

Period II A Period II B 



MM A 


Mi4 B 








Mr-5 B 


Mr-7 A 


Mr-9 A 


Period V 


Mr-5 A 


Period VI 


Mr 9 B 


402 MEHRGARH 5-9 PREHARAPPAN: Periods 1V-VI SEALS 


Period IV 


Mr 7 B 


Mr-8 A 


Mr-8 B 










SEALS EARLY HARAPPAN: Period VII 


MEHRGARH10-14 403 




Early Harappan: 
Period VII 


Mr 10 A 


Mr-10 B 


Mi 13 A 


Mr-14 B 


Mr-14 A 








404 


MEHRGARH 15 


EARLY HARAPPAN: Period VU 


SEALS 


Mr-15 A 




Mr-15 ft 







SEALS; GRAFFITO EARLY HARAPFAN: Period Vti 


MEHRGARH 16-18 


405 



Mr-16 B 


Mr-! 6 A 


Mr 17 A 


Mr-17 t> 


Mr-18 A (25 %) 








Nwd 1 A (50%) 


406 NARU-WARO-DHARO1-3 


Naru-Waro-dharo 


GRAFFITI on pottery 


Nwd-2 A (100 %) 


Nwd-3 A (100 %) 









EARLY & MATURE HARAPPAN: Periods I B U NAUSHARP 1-3 


407 


Nausharo 


Early Harappan: Period 1 B 


Ns-1 A 


Ns-1 B 




Ns-1 C 



Mature Harappan: 


Period II 






Ns 2 A 


Ns 3 A 









408 


NAUSHARO 4-8 


MATURE HARAPPAN: Periods 11-111B 



Ns-4 A (1) (50%) 



Ns^t A (2) (100 %) 


Period III 


Ns 5 A 

Period III B 



Ns-6A 






Ns 7 A 


Ns-B A 


Ni-S a 





















MATURE & LATE HARAPPAN: Periods III B-C NAUSHARO 9-10 NINDOWARI I 409 


Late Harappan: 
Period III C 



Ns-10 A 



Ns 9 A 


Ns-10 C 

Ns-10 B Ns-10 D 



Nindowari-damb 



Nd-l B Nd-I A bis 


Nd-I A 








410 NINDOWARl 2-3 PERIANOGHUNDA11-2 


SARA! KHOLA 13 (E.H.) 



Nd-3 B N " i 3 D 


Nd-3 A 


Penan o-ghundai (Early Harappan ?) 



Pg-1 A (100 %) 

Sarai Khola (Early Harappan) 


Pi-2 A (50 %) 




5kh-2A(50%) Skh 3 A (50 %) 


Skh-I A (100 %) 







(EARLY HARAPPAN) SARA / KHOLA 4-10 


(LATE HARAPPAN) SfRRI / 


411 



Sldi-fi A ClOO %} 


Skh 9 A (50 %) 


Skh-IO A (50 %) 


Sibri-damb 

(Late Harappan) 



5b-1 a StM D 


Sb 4 A 


Sb-1 S 








412 


SIBRI 2 


(LATE HARAFFAN) SEAM (INTRUSIVE) 











(INTRUSIVE) SEALS 


iLATE HARAFPAN) SIBRI 3 


413 



A I Sb-J A 1 Sb 3 A 3 A 4 SM A 5 



Sb 3 a 










414 TARAKAI QUA 1-9 (EARLY HARAPPAN) SEALS; GRAFFITI on pots 

Tarakai Qila (Early Harappan) 




Trq-1 U 



Trq 3 A 





Trq-t A 



Trq-6 A (100 %) 


Trt| 7 A (100 %) 


Ttcj 9 A (50 %) 


Trq-5 A (50 %) 


Trq-8 A 000 %) 








PROVENANCE UNKNOWN 1-6 


415 


Provenance unknown 



E 











416 ADDENDA: MOHENJODARO 858,1659 


RAHMAN-DHERl 270 


Addenda 



M-I659 A (2) (400 %) 



Rhd-270 A {50 %) 




COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 12 


417 



2i M4271 A 


















418 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS SA 



4: M-J65I A 





COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 5-6 


419 



6: M 1370 A 

















420 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 7-8 






COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 9 10 


421 



I Or M-1277 A 















422 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 11-12 




It: M-J40Q B 1-2 


12; Tiq4 A 





COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 13-14 


423 















Ifi: M-J406 B 























COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 17-18 


425 



18: M-1M9 A 











426 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 19-22 



19: M-1430 A 



20: M 1430 B 











COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 23-26 


427 



26: M-1431 E 















428 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 27-28 



27. M-1540 B 











COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 29-30 


429 













430 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 31-32 










COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 33-34 


431 











432 


COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHS 35-36 



3* Ns-i a 











TABLES 1-2 


433 


Table 1: The iconographic criteria applied in arranging the 'unicorn' seals 


X 

a b 


31 

• 9111111 

fflffllfflli 

11 

SBDU 

* as 

m * m 

_L 

d A Ml 

c no cult object 

IE 

a b 

pyy c yy 

d T 


32 

• 9 

b p o 

9 * y 


Table 2: Symbols of the form classes of Indus seals and tablets used in this volume 





































434 


DATA 


Basic data Tor the objects illustrated 


Cutwiim I in the MWing ubulamm give* thr CISI awmher* atugned to fbe object* 
be present solumr Number* (I). (2j. and to on. wientd Demerit 



l oUumn 1 |i.n (he number uf me object « the currou .bum of the FC iFumnh 
conemdanrc. *ce be km |. stab it the haul (or the arrangement of me maienal ut be 
nSI iKkvfl at the Lmrerwry of Hchtakl TN» tnfnttiulioq It weful. even on m 
mreran bum. m that be FC fallen help m tctdmi the tme np at um . at fcel Uaudnu 
1977 May of the PC number, ate nhrmx* with theme of Mnhadrva*. but many *et 
different, die number* of be tnti tcamailiwe* are ccmetatnd tn be tnremd »deme ad 

rrmnrt, the FC number* replace 


o end Harappa (which roomtaat the hub id the material' art namely keyed to the 
•n number* tn the plate* of the evavanoa wpun* nee twroduuwmj Proper 

Very few of the object* with FC number* between 0(10] 0»80 and J7V7- 47)1 


numben Man with HU through HUi The other 
eaccpnag Gharo Bhiro Lew an Lnebanr, Mefcrgarh and Sibn. aim in 


Cidinat* 3 give* the etcivarxm numben or comipombn* date The aMverlataon* 
appearing m thu column me not included m the following lua of abtarvtatton* (tie lllft 
etc. tee above, no column 21, but they will be captained in CISI 1 It may he 


utually refer to layer* Some object* mt marttd with wrong ucavanon numben. but a 
detailed dtacunlou of there cut* t« postponed a> Ctll 3, m *uth cam. the column 
•unply p>o 777. whach It ala* our rode for caaca where the data arc altogether 


irfiinilM number.* > M«*eum ataaber* given la la 
a umber for a year (eg 30 • 1*301 *e>cr to the u 


d a kept, and the m 
>| wuh a rw 

* o» the National 


( dam 5 p>n me source* of the ptwangrupb* (and the caw dnwtngi puMnhed in 
lhi« vokitne The fint referrara cower* all umipeeifleil phmngrapht Whenever the 
photograph* .applied by individual vholar* had a negative number or othrr 


d by the Rowan h Projoci MubrnyOstoD of « 


F R Alkhin - phonograph .applied by Dr Ft AiUdun 
ASI - Anhueo*ogkal Wvrv of India 
AV - phomgraph when by Mr Am Vuofcdaxan fa 
of Amo* and Afncwi Suatw*. Hetamei Untvtnity 
Balorii 1973 - N A Halrch la wwch of the ladua Culture tue* m Sind. Rufirna ./ 
nuL 3i-3 (inly I9T31 II I*. ft pi 


ttrumwig - phoragrapb uappbad hy Mr Robert M. ■ run .wig h 
Catai l«M - Jean Mane Catal. F.uwiirt fAmt i Ml. Parti 14M 
CHI . Coepaa of Jmdm Seaft and fmcnpeicuu 

DAK - George F Dates A J M Kemryer. lua*atu*a m DtaAtn/n-tM^ rakwam 
fhr poarn. PhUadelpfaa I9f6 


Dale* 1967 - George F Dale*. Soath Aata. cartwn wtrung - mil midecipbcred 

£tprdttim* V2 <1967k »-3T 

Darn 1971 » Ahmad Hasan Dana. Eteaveonm ■ the Carnal Valtry Aaornr Faittaan J 
(1970-71) 1-177 

DAini a phonograph taken by the Department of Pkuaetgnpby. UatMTUy of HeUmkl 
i from a can tupplicd by Ihed Waller A. Punter*m 

Elf • MS Vita, Caruvafioni ai Honppa 10, Dtifa 1940 

FJ - photograph taken hy Mt Erja Labdeiiper* tor the CHI pmpet rf the Department 
uf Asian and Afneaa Scudw*. HriaaAi Lmteruly 


Faincr.1. - photograph tuppbed by Ibid Waller A Fatnemi 
FC - me Fianub soncordme Kterne K.wkeum n m rad Aako Parpoia. Corpan y 
trail (a fhr fadktf unyv iDepannwat of Auaa aad Afneaa Vudwi, llaiventty of 
HrlatokL Rocarrh Reptaii 11. Helaiak. 1979. lad. t> 
si the Iran a. thr fada. tr*t|e idud ZL 191 
tkr fadbt tenpr (ibid. 3i I9B2 

Fdf -F amHn dr FindL VM. I Te*Je. pw Jeaa-Fn^os lamge a Mart*lie Sanmm. 


Voi n Ctw 


v I II Delhi I9U 

Frank# l9tU - L*r Frank#. A wircoow of mwnbod object, rt 

Dare, in M. Jamew A G Lrban led* i. faaeran opivo Vof t Repcen o. field 
work earned out m Mohen|^Den> Faktataa. |9U Al by the UMFO - Aachen 
m: 117-131. A 


d by Dr C. lamge 


a • phoeogtaph taken by Mr Jyrti L.taUJ far the CISI project of the Depunmeni af 
Aiwa awl Afrwaa Mud**. Hzluakl l nntrwiy 
Kbau x F A Khwt- F'riomwaey rapan on Cat Dip eirawwlum /93 7-33. Karwla ad. 

1*19991 

K10* a Khairpur L niverairy 


LF * Office of the Northern Circle. Department 
Government of Fakutaa. Old Fan Ufmre 

Mihadcvan 1977 . Invatham Mehadraa* Fhr /aAi* term Tt ul raw«obvr wwi 
aoMet ihlcnattr* of the ArthaMlogical Sarvey of Indu 77|. New DcOh 1*77 


MIC - team MenJtall (adk tfohncw dan. ami iha ladat CMkaiLm I IQ. 1 


NMP . NuuataJ Muteum of FakJitam Aar ah, 

F * Depanowni of Aftbatoiogy and Mowtum. Gcoemnaem of Ptaku 
taken by Mr S M tiyaa for dw Oil prugact 
FA - Faiuaaa Anrawrulog*, Kara.hi 
FC « prtraae coUccoon 

FSW - OcparurcM id A n lwe u to gy . 1 mvmiry tt FVshawar 
Fu - Faniah Sene*. Photo Aichtve of dw Dilector Grarrai ASI. Janpalh. New 13 
Si • Sind Sena*. Hxno Archive of dke OHasaor Gonetul ASL lanpalh. New Del* 
SMAS - Swat Museum iSaada ShanO 


b*. The fadWt tmluiuluw. M «t. Cambridge I 1 

















DATA M-595 to M-787 


435 


¥ W tom iirjmiu L: i*-i mi 

M-Hl'MJftl tlk>3SJ MEJW* 

(It WKt 

M622 314* DK IDZflt MU 4® 

M623 0251 m MD«I 

MiH lllli vs IIS L P L* 11 

M K> EM7 VS IfTi StD RH 

Mftlft ln|; DKCM! *«J T&fcW.'l 

-4-C7 |KH KJC »2 MD4KT 


M-62B 1011 


M62) 020) 

m.«o osait 

M-631 I IJCDv 
M-4JS I ill 7 
M-fl33 |0|0 
MJlii 3o«i 
"4-635 liNft 
MtM 201? 
M-637 |034 

W*» IW 
M-639 Oljfr 
M-W 0503 
M-641 UU 
*4«2 (1554 

MHHl 0111 
M*U 1551 
M-645 1)11* 

M-fcWUi 1653 

«> 

M-*n 1004 

M *41H too 

*hh» um 
M *» 1012 

M-»l 2*T| 
M-aJi ijidj 
M453 3m 
M-ft*4 23 rtl 
M-45S itrrr 

«-*» 2X1| 

MW 2026 
M-M* 1034 
MM0 2*16 
M-M0 0740 
M M i I 1207 


M«0 I Ot I 
M4A5 3?iJ7 
Mftw 162 i 
M 663 1114 

*4 Wft 2243 

M-«7 1111 

■W tf* 2013 
W-6M 2fc$ft 
M-670 I Din 
*4-67 J 1021 
M-673 IIH1J 
M *71 lay 
M-fiU HHlg 
M *73 2197 

M-676 34*7 

M«7 Dm 

M4P* I DM 
M 679 30(4 

M-fWOiij a:te 

04 

W-Ml 2112 
M.fi« 2690 
M«[|| 2174 

a i 


1012025 MD«m, 

MM 41* 

CTK-iMW KWXID 
VS 1150 MOTTO 

hh 7jj rap vr ivi 

ILK. 4irm MD.MM41I 
V3 J0J7 IvMk 30X11 

cut 11*1 Mj»4p,3«£ 

PX-CIJBS WUtMH 
DSC 133* MOW* 

DK-C ESI M|J432 
VS IMA MD 576 
DX444J MPSOT 
UK 1211 MD Cii 

NJt 5700 MD4» 

SP319? MD7&| 

DK.L112 *i[DT|3 

SOn X.P.I7J0 
DK 1X58 MD475 

DKTO1S UD7I1 

.MD 7|fl_Ji1 Hi 
V5 2326 JtMF S0,ai 
DK-e II3J MD LW..WJJ 
HK 5605 t,P-t*4> 

HtSttO MD KM 
DK 720.1 MUM 
t>K-lEI4j> MD *4} 

DX I MU MD755 
PK72S0 MD lT(.t I■ ri* 
DM \M VP4B2 

PK BOX* MD7|4 

DKJJ73 MD629 
VI 3# HM Mil 
DX7JJ7 MD444 
MN S56IU EXh 

d>: il:h 4 MD.iem. 

MM 435 
MD I hi, Jilin) 

upr.i.4 
MDill 

M0 474 
MU 451 
MD«7 
MIX 551 
MD<*? 

SMJ r Vi I|T 
MD 706, .Vj3D 
KMP 3174* 

M0 330 
L. P-17*6 

mo m 

MDDJ7, 

MM 43ft 
LP-JI17 

Mil 4*7 

HDH7 
MtJ7l2 
MDJ56 
MDJTB 
MDfTt 
*0)11(1 


HR EftH 
DK 994b 
0 X 71777 
IIP. 55)1 
Cat 4747 

SO Esso 
UK 3561 
DK9T13 
HR 1*7 
VS 14*4 
DX-D 1 JT 

dk rsa 

DK-DH 
DX ,M 7 V 
□K ,5771 
□K-i 563 

VS 105V 

DX4-tm 
OX 7101 

OK 11001 
DK-M W 
OK 12J34 


M r.H4 2B9J mvimi EX1 

M-6B5 127* 178 42+4 MD Vs 

M ftSft 2324 OK 9232 MD 591 

M*5T am HR2J66 S1D51* 

M *U 1063 MR 1695 MD *3fl 

M4W? 3413 DK5B31 MO M3 

«7VXJ 0M3 Dfc-i E60 MD442 

M-lWt 1230- V3X3U MD75J 

M1051 lift 5414 MD 424 

M«S.l 0391 5)K ?IM AID 459 

MH194 1341 l!H 5M* i,m«l 

M»W EZ23 HH 5146 MD551 

22*7 DK1I0S MD Mil 

M-em Lyn hmjxsi md4V3 

M«* W7i7 DK(W?3 MD471 

W<4W H55fl HR 50B5 t, P-1 HI 

M7U.1 (lit.} DK-I 11» L, 7 1741 

W-TOl HhM DK-E2401 

M TQJ 233* OK i UflO VtD 4BA 

W-703 1439 DK WliJ MDMM.JI7) 

M-7IM 2351 OK 6377 MD W.rti, 

MM 439 


av 3iii.pyss 

1L7IX fill: filX 

IL 6E4; (2i P JJX t fL 2i lMl 

P 4fM, A, |L. 622 

P 60ft; A: IL, “fi* 

AV Jll ,* p 12.11 
JLSia AiJU V3*«. ■ li. I2M7 
ID >73, A 5v 5:6*27. * J ( . |l:|ri 
IL*M; X Si. I 4*«i, i SL L2_549. 
P-KH 

iL *47. A SI I,*49-,* .11 12:349. 
*l»i; Plus 
3L2S;* POJ 
31,921, XP4477 
JL M; * P3< 

JL j«, LSt E3:l 
P-Dft; A: S. > 

IL 393. i. Si I4 2S4 
JL9I9* 51 12:4*4 
IL SM*, * 5L 21:300 
JL 5T9; i .Si iXJifi 
JL TZliaiSf. t2:5E3 
IL 931), i p HH 
IL RIM: * P >£h 

IIL 612, * Si 12-5 LX ■ bsi P UP 

IL S43 r i. P 67.1 

IL935 

AV 48!, A *P 129* 

JL *42. 4 P 376 
1! iMLfll «. PftVl. 

JLW^* S 19:591 
ILZI; HI* t? 

IL %th i. P 2S7 
AV 410; y: P 12afi 
H. Htl; 1, Si I 2 J22 
P 333; A ]L 3M 
P 47*; A toi: JL *Jfi 
IL 923,4 P6]2 
PM;* Si ttttLJ 
IL 5 96, * p 3W 
JL 924; * P6I7 
IL 77J t i Si I* J7I 
AV 559. i C VH 
11, 640, ,|. p 571 
Adm 

Ik, 4*4. 4 P tOt 


Jtsia* Pis? 

JL »W; J. P63B 

11.492, * Si 19 5 J 1 

JL 6IB: «; JSi I2J3L 

IL #02. r Si * IA 5*4. j J»i: P 4l* 

JL 657; ■. P 415 

P47J 

J l. IW. ■ P 553 
Jl. 27. 9. P 23 
IL 502, *: P 3*3 
31.is. l, Pill 
P L71I 

IL 5 T 6t ■: P 330 
P 1317 

Jl. 9JO: ■: P 603 
JL.J4J: K* P 1*9 

AV 441. » P ItMf 

JL 6L6: *. P 175 

n. UNO, <1 (*: Si 19.595, 

JL13fcf?lR Si 11-JUJ 

JL W*l. ■ .SL 23:461 

JL 748: i: Sl 1M:4«; * 94i. P ATP 

(kjAl JL. Vt,9: 1111. P 5r.O; 

[2] A IL«T, 131* P7VI, 

I. PEM. pi. IUttJ.374 
IL 19* 

IL 65X, ■; 54 J2.5I9 
IL7*4. n P 4411 
IL 6M, n 94 12511 
IL Mk ii P 342 
3L7IA;*;P*5» 

IL M7 .i P J94 

IL BOX ±- Si 1XJ43 

ILMH.tSi 1X517 

JL <37. * Si 19.615. * Mi Y All I 

IL Kh5; * Si 1LX51 

IL 4419. ■] p >145 

JXHM.il It 21.214 

TL «yH; ■: SL 1X51T 

3L ft2>, ■ Si 11.377 

AV 51(9-, t 3L L3iia 

AV J«*; I P IZ33 

IL 647, i: Si IXJ49 

IL 651), X 54. 2X4*2 

It- MAI , v 60l 

JL 404; ■: P IW 


M-7TF7 
MHOfi 
VL7W 
M7J0 
HOI | 

M-m 

Mils 
M-TI* 

S4.7y 
M-716 
HT47 

H-Tii 
M-7ES 
M-J2TJ 
*4-72 [ 

M-T22 
M-733 
M-J34 
M-725 
VL7J6 
M-7I7U! 316B 


HKSflL LPliLA AVjUXaPI&J 

1 IB 43 B 5 MOVVJX. JL 3751 ; *: P |46 

MM 439 

OK |»M| 54D 431 JL WO 4 P W 

PK *923 MD ISR. Jit JI7 IL 124 x P IXt 

MDE2XJD.JB# It Jjfc i. P 24* 


l'I'M MD 52.1 PJEH 1376 
HR 46.1* MLJ457 


Wl DR 2147 


MOV? ft*. 
MMW 
*03 454 
MD 314 


IL 116 

JXMfr. * Si 1X31* 
JL 4AChm P L47 


0X6624 
OK *JST 
OK67TO 
DK t |W7 
□K E JJ4S MD3BJJ. 

MM 44 


P 357, A Mi IL m M SI II JT 
JL S46 * p J24 
MDIftt IL 676c x P 436 

MD I98..W.JJS' P 254 

IL 4413. u KL 12S2J 


DK6&44 
OK 4524 
IffllTI 
0K-L2D6 
DK HJ 


MD59T 

MD9I5 

VtD?® 


MD4J3 


PK libW MO 541 
DKiilU NMP9B4U 


OK 17131 ML3 \Ob 


2tfj 

EETT 

07K 


M-721 
M-T29 
M-730 
M.7U 
M-732 
MT.M 
M-734 
M7W 
M 736 
MTID 
11.719 

Vt-IJA 
M-7« 

94-741 
M-742 
W-W 
M-741 
M-TJ? 

MMA 
M-74T 
M-741 
M Lw 
M T30 
*4-751 
*1.753 
M-753ilt 25SS 

m 


UL-Hh 
VS 2S4I 


NMP 50 |71 
U P-L7-H1 
EKB 

MIWZDE LHP. LL-4H 


P 499, A Mi IL 745 
P 473. A bn: IL ffi I 
PAI7;ii Si 12 556 
PSfQvxffi. T7-4Q 
IL6|7.* Si 1:2.354 
IL 7BL x P 453 

pa 

AV3 

JLZLxMG 
JL STL fj) x P IT?: 
VD 61 k, 511 W JL >17; 12) X P 539; 

x FEW. pJ Ju.4*| 169 
JL 22. x P 16 
AV 4 W,xSI r? : i 7 


HK if. ju 
DK SUM 


MD?y 
S'MP 50.124 
OX 12 J MD 111,1031 
DK C WTO Mt) I9LOJ3 
DK 4795 MO J«2 
D«-F, 2543 MD470 


DK Will 5 


IL 1152 

JL KM: x PA|7 
3L (7. A.X P J3 
PI5I 

ft, J4J, X Si IL523 
31. 549. j PJ21 
IL 435: 4 Si. 13J4A 


iMD 32B, 59 IJD JL 114A. 4 F 265 
KHP 


2421 

2Sn 

03W 

to*i 

1175 

T»1 

2471 

ma 

2065 

UtQ 

1)156 


SMP I7J1R 

w;a* 

MD, MM 44) 
MP till 
A4D54S 
*40 217) 
MD436 
MDW7 
MO Tift 

169.3:1 Jl 


VS 47 
DK5494 
DK 7175 
17f 

OK 72J9 
VJ 15*1 
□K 2 [9* 

DK 6429 
FIR 2973 
DK MVH4 NMP5Q1#* 

DK 3339 MO 319 

OH 4?W l_ p-iT46 

OX ; LP I742 


M-7JJ 
M 73* 
M-J56 
*4 737 

MT54 

\i,m 

M-74D 

M-7A1 


Mm 
M-764 
M T69 
M766 
M 7*7 
M-7H 
M7» 
M-77D 
M 771 
*1772 
M-T7J 
M-774 
M-773 
M-.7T6 
M-777 

*4-771 

M.7T9 


1143 

1140 

■try 

25417 

11*4 

23& 

IIF-U. 

NI7 


21>9) 
0267 
OMI 
11274 
1136 
JOM 
k 119 

2676 

J4» 

0115 

0343 


PK6J3J 

DK 2971 
DX J279 
OK yB4 
DK4MI 


wo mi 

MDAB3 
M&4T7 
MD 331 
UD.Hr 
MD J03.3J m 


m 1D7U Ml) »t 
DK3AI* VtD 526 


DK-i 492 
HR 3167 
DK 7a? 


MO 617 
MO&14 
MD666 
MJJftT? 
OK MIS MD 650 

DK L09S0 *111435 

ox I2x> MD6S4 

PK 70713 MD6?1 

DK 57El 
Dfc-E Oft 


HP 765 
M|*44St| 
DK lfM9t MP MS 
IfR 49«6 MD434 


2536 


DKIM73 
OK 6£4»i 
DK IJJ2 
FIR 42BX 
UK, W27 
DK -E *4? 
0X6(02 


MD694 
H0742 
StD 54(i 
MO 799 
MP 643 
MD720 
MDJH9J. 


Jjty PK 5697 MDftlfl 

2622 DK 9*1341 MDMJ JH. 

MM 46? 

I ITS [JK-E 1521 * 404*1 

2251 DK i%m MD 164 

nn PK-DIkt MO.W47 

MM 46 ft 

1117 3ER 4169 

N29 VS T)R 


M 7X3 FEil 3D 1731 

MTSft Huf DK-E 2Sft 

M-W 2S0J UK 5*59 


MD 7 L 9 
MD 7)4 ST377 

MO LIL.UD 
L, P-914 
*40*216 


AV7 

JL®9flx.Sl. 11516 

F 139 

Pill 

JLHtfcufASJ 
JL 493,* F2U4 
JL MS. x ii 13 J46 
H, -1 JR 4 P 599 
JLWT:x M, JL547 
It, *1*; l: P 252 

IL30.X F 17 

JL \fi> i- P 312 
AV 493. x 4) 12519 
AV 404; x P 12B4 
|L S7A, x s. 19 5*8, 

1L967 

IL6.W, n p J741 

IL 554F; ■: P 12? 

JL3*i: tiPJJB 
JL 566 ; x P 12ft 
JL 400, ,. Si 12:453 
JL ML » P 4 It) 

II 79ft, x P5I7 

IL759; , Jl lliSlR ■ hii: P 5SV 
F 5*7. x SL (1:6)4, 

JL«3 

JL9M; xP375 
JL3#4;* ri* 

IL9C0; x P JS* 

IL 997. t P 570 
IL *39*. x P *15 
JL All; x P 3417 
I k SpB; tf |44 

Jl. 34J; u Si 12517; j St 9> Lit 
JL 939 . x P H 9 .i 
IL 994. i P 642 
JL 150 i P 4*9 
JL <23 

JL £H: I; p 1J3 
JL£H;»rP«S 
XMlfrP 134 

JL 741, i P53S 
■L.lTt, x'SU,!:22i 

IL 629:1: Si. 125.42 
P34H 

P 1% A, SL S«ft3X t 5i 13 J 

JLittJ.xSL li5M 

IL SOL A; JtL V5691; 

t SL L2523; I bit P26I 

IE. 4?ft n SI. L252TJ 

AV4fiJ;xSt 13:3 

P 33*, A Da JL 55«, * Si I9:»2 

















436 DATA M-788 to M-947 


M-TW 
MTO 
M-TW 
MT9I 
M n: 
M-79) 

MT*4 

MW 

MW 

M-79T 

M-W 

M-TW 

m wn 

M 801 
MMU 

M803 
M HIM 
MK» 

M-*rr 
M HOB 
M N» 


MHO 
M III 

Mill 

M813 


M-HI4 
M 813 
M lie 
M 117 
Milt 
M HI* 
M-120 
M-K2I 
MR! 
M HU 
M824 
M-123 
M 126 
M-877 
MH2* 


M-821 

M-830 

Mill 

MU2 


MU) 
M *U 
M-135 
MB36 

M 111 
MIU 
MIW 
MMO 

M-MI 

MS42 

M Ml 
MM4 
MM3 

M *47 
MW 
MW 
M430 
*4*51 
M452 
M-B53 
M 454 
MM3 
M *56 
M 157 

m» 

M h-w 
MIWO 
M MAI 
MHU 

MV,. 
MUS4 
MIA) 
MHA6 
M 167 
M IAB 
M*m 


2M3 

UBS 

1141 

0859 

2011 

0125 

3057 

1221 

210) 

0527 

1054 

0253 

2**6 

2101 

1113 

11)1 

2570 

0215 

urr*9 

366* 

2146 

254* 


2354 

2211 

3639 

0135 


3425 
25)5 
2434 
243) 
10*9 
3051 
0106 
12 V) 
1349 

,,h-. 

1164 

1239 

0520 

251) 

2114 


36A1 

2274 

2546 

0137 

2211 

256* 

2179 

0149 

0236 

236* 

2476 

2617 

2HM 

270* 

0142 

12W 

2202 

100) 

11)6 

2241 

1121 

2531 

2660 

241) 

2235 

2501 

2471 

1211 

2091 

2119 

2(151 

mv 

1123 

3253 

2621 

1340 

1109 

2616 

IIM 

3175 

0169 


116040-407 EXB 1374 
OK EM* MDT25 
HH 1450 MW 726 
19)040 529 EXB I3H6 
OK 11212 MW 175 
OK I 441 MW. MM 456, 

9 in 

OK 11126 MD 221. MIU 
DK B 601 MO 719 
OK 79)6 MD 187, M123 
TTJ MDIH9 

it) 14 M) KM 11652 

DK 3287 MD 724 

L'PliMO VM EXB 1)72 
nK4|ltl MOW 
DK C 2394 (MD 276) 

•** in KHP 
VI 3)91 MD «RB 

DK >44* MD 492 

DK 6311 Ml) 550 

13611 EXB 

DKIWM MD412 
DK 12969 MD. MM 455 
OK 5707 MD58J7 

MM (M 

DK VWO MD 1*5, X) HI 
DK 12654 MD 59 167. 

MM 4)8 
0X8*83 MO 480 
DKtfiOl MD JO 177, 

MM 444 

OK 3831 UP 17*4 

DK 7)3) L P17)l 

DK 7062 MD 231 

DK 622* MD, MM 460 

V5I332 MD 219.3321 
OK lUMtl) MD 1*11. W til 
DK i 82 8*0 230.3*171 

VJlATl MD43) 

OK-C 3X27 MO 14). M 44 
IIK 786) MD. MM 4)7 

Itt «M MO 113 

►n 3792 MD 474 

DK 13424 MD 3*1 

DK 5392 MD7I7 

DK 10)17 MW 5# IV. 

MM 45) 

DK 8411 MD 329, W III 
OK 12*57 L. f 1734 

OK 6125 MI) MM 

mm m 

DK <656 MD 50 179. 

MM MCI 

OK 3423 HM 13653 
DK 1223 IIM 13654 
OK 133118 MD 4*J 
OK « mil UP 1734 
DK 13890 MD. MM 449 
DK 63)7 Ml) 144 
OK 5709 MO MM 463 
DKK963 MOM 134, 

MM 463 

DF8IMD342 EXB 
SO 3395 MO W224, 

MM 443 
OK 1830 MD 332 
OK E U» MW i)* 

OK ■ 1216 MD31) 

IW U16 MD47I 
IW 2522 MW 53* 

DK 80)5 MD S44 
V5 2542 MD MM 441 
OK HIM NMPS2JD9|-> 
DK 9049 MO in 
DK #093 MDT33 
DK 119.14 MO MB 
OK 5852 MW 5*7 
DK 6266 MD736 

HH 4585 MO 537 
DK 10961 MD 4J9 
DK 1310* iff) 732 

DK 10471 MD 584 
DK-* 550 MD 176,30)71 
HR 37321 MD 461 
DK 8119 MDM12I. 

MM 452 
UK 711) MD47H 
HR 4)46 MO 565 
DK-E2.10 MDII2 
DK9QK3 MD437 
HR 487) MD 705 
UPMM0624 EXB 1175 B 
■WTH EXB 
12002*50 


JL 193 

It 805 . » P 633 

U. *08. a Si t2-S));a bn PhJI 
IL 191 

JL 5XS. 6 P 238 

p m 
P 283 

IL 972. i- Si 12529 
92)7.6 Si 2122) 

P 23). A Ma IL Sit 
AV 557. c P 797 
P 624. A Mi n.ao« 

IL 183 

ft. 55). a P 298 
P 28) 

IL 638. a: & 1251) 

P 383; A bu IL 63ft a: St 1*5*5 
P467, AIM* R, 707 
JL149A Aatta. 
ft. 399 «. P 36) 

P 1)3 

IL376.4 P 138 

0.111.4 P2)l 

IL 199. a P 12? 

IL 6*9 a P 393 
IL 372; * P IT) 

AV 499. 4 S 1*5*2 
P 1263. A hi* AV 480 
IL 300.4. P 2*5 
11.403.4 Pill 
ft. *99. a Si. 12515 
IL 321. a P 329 
IL 304; a P 2*4 
ILttl.a P347 
IL KM. a P 243 
xm. Plil 
P 119 

IL 648. a: IL 12519 
ft.699. a. PAD 

P 62). A tat ft. 9JL a: I. 18 617 
IL 974. a: P 114 


IL 477. a: P277 
P 1367.4. St 23459 
ft. 364. a P IB 

PI33 

AV 3)9. a: P 796 
AV 544) a P 795 
A. 631. a. P 346 
AV 485 

P 145; A ft. J9B; a SL 32440 
ft.541.r P2X4 
ft. 40l.» Si tt)«* 

R I6». A tat JL 36) 


JL IW 

ft- m. r P 132 

ft. 351. 6 P 303 
ft. 167; a: P 661 
ILJ77.a P XOI 
JL 439. a Si. 12517 
IL 072. a P 44* 

JL 708. a P45I 

ft. W4La PI74 

0.82.4 Si 21214 

ft 489. k Sl 24588; a Mu P 396 

IL III. a Si. 1*595, a hu PMA 

IL 547. 6 St. 21458 

ft. 740: a ^ 18401 

IL 812, a S< 18 396 

IL 662 a. P 421 

ft. 580 . a P J33 

ft. 173. a P 68*. 

IB. C. f tee n I30L 416. 447| 
ft. 749, a P Ml 
IL 539: a: P 24* 

IL 367. a. P 130 
ft. 377. a Si. 21.314 

IL 624. a: P 3*5 
P 490. t St 12517 
IL 571. m Si. 12547 
IL 592 a P 36* 

II954. a Sl. 12 537 
ft 185 


M 870 11*0 DKE 1809 MD 4*5 

M 871 1384 DK-CJTO3 80)757 

M 877 0132 OK <103* U P 1728 

84 87) 1170 DK E 303) 80)273 

8**74 000.1 OK-BH17 81031)7. 

MM 4)1 

M-87J 1189 DKC202J MOM 41. 


M-876 0904 OK 8633 MD8T3 

M 877 0261 DK 7562 MDS54 

M 878 1093 HR 4411 8403)1*. 

Mil 447 

M-879 3121 DK 7*0* MD38 fftB. 

MM 430 

MIK 015* DK-tllll UP 1743 

84 *11 1243 L 476 811) 594 

M M2 2312 DK 6914 MD 733 

Mill 02*6 DK 6*46 80)41*1 

M M4 3873 UPHWOI77 EXB 1373 
M 885 052) DK 1981 MD 

M -886 0)05 DK 8695 80)663 

M 887 1169 DK C 810 81073* 


M 888 US) DK 188 

84 889 1126 HR 32117 


MDWB*. 

MM 470 

MD 210 


MBW 2||1 UK IOI89 MD538 
8U9WHKJ71 DKC.119I 84D311 


(21 

MR 047 
M 89) 2639 

81-894 J39) 

MW 2263 
84 896 21)4 

84-897 134) 

84-898 21*7 

MHW 2242 
M WO 2JS) 
M*)l 237a 
84 902 (04) 

M 90) 1394 

M-W4 0137 
M W5 1216 

M 90* 0*37 

M-W7 2192 
MW* o*5l 
MW9 02H) 
M*I0 <071 
84-911 0388 

84*12 <0(0 

M 91) 115) 

84-914 2143 

84*1) 1211 

84 916 1204 

M9I7 1224 
8* 918 0119 

M*19 3)43 

84*20 121* 

8*931 0137 

84 922 1283 

84 921 1546 

M934 2591 

84*25 1293 

M *26 2319 

84927 ini 
84*28 1302 

84*29(1)1144 

(2) 


HR 15*5 
DK 8544 
DK 8480 
OK 4*13 
DK 11398 
DK *111 
DK U72* 
DK 6300 
DK 3421 
UK 12516 
DK 7603 
DK ISI2 
DK . 46» 
HR 286* 
UPSiMO- • 
DK 12X16 
DKE4W 
DK 5*96 
DK 5288 
DK 6*74 
DK 5150 
DK A 274 
DK 1302) 
HR 5789 
DK^4)5 
HR 1951 
DK-i 347 
DK 3627 
DK 1319 


DK. 1087 
DK-C 2766 
DK-I- 47 
OK 7601 
OK E3tt 
DKUIW 
HR 5703 
I1R 5607 
HR 5076 


80)887 
MD 721 
84D498 
84D1B) 
MD743 
MD 197 
■40 446 
84044) 

MD 110,54 164 

6IDS69 

MD57I 

MD 709 

84DS18 

840641 

8ID 344) 

EXI 1381 
MD333 
MD7«* 
80)440 
MD678 
80)363 
80)821 
MD 120 
80) 727 
N8CP 
LPWt 
MD 2*9 
80)311 
SMP 

MD386 II. 

MM 474 
L P-1736 
MD 3)3 
8*0 557 
MD327 
8*0 740 

UM7B 

MD 682 
MD393 
8*D67T 
80)668 


M*» 0306 

M*3I ODOI 

8)933 (Qua 
84 933 2140 
81 *34 U38 

8**3) 3144 

M*36 (197 

8**37 

8**38 2158 

84*39,1, J652 



8**41 2236 

81*42 129a 

81**) 2282 
84 *44 2419 

8**45 1208 

M*46 2)5* 

M947 Mm 


DK 4811 
DK B802 

DKSI80 
DK 11746 
DM36 

DK 11036 
DK C 3202 
DK I tew 

DK 11)93 
DK 9)4.1 

DK 1210 

OK 12047 
DK-E 976 
DK 13849 
DK 5787 

l« 53*7 
DK 3043 
DK 7571 


80)438 

MOV) 34. 

MM 46V 
MD. MM 476 
MO 6)8 
8*0 3*4 n. 

MM 464 
80)7)7 
8ID 733.11* 
80)350 
8*D243 
MD 558 
8*t> 649, 9J4J 
MD in ion. 

MM 472 
MD26S 
MD164 
MDI7I 
MOW*. 

MM 473 
8*0 510 
80) 7)4 
MD 1*1 


ft 619, a: Si 12521 
JL 86*. a: P 661 
AV «L a: P 13*2 
ftMErPftt 
ft. m. a. PIS) 

MSS 

ft MM), a P m 
P 446. A ft 6*4 

JU37L ai P III 

JI.40U.a Si 2021J 
P 1264 

IL 727. a P 496 
P 622. A bu ILM16 
JL 626. a Si UWftatat Pf» 
ft 194 

P«M. AMa 0.8)4 
P 578. A tat ft. 89* a Sl 21 234 
P6U.AS1 *438. 
a EL MiXPwai 
IL 999. • P 136 

ft 487. A. a tat P 269. 
a Si 113.11 
IL 656. a P 4)3 
ft 704.<l» A P 470; 

<l) a. Si. 13 >20. 
ft 979 

ILKTT.a P 620 
IL (SI. a P4|4 

ft.311. Atat PMT.a 5< 2IJT7 

JL 8(2. a P 641 

ft >25. a P 245 

ft. 3419. r P MB 

II «OT. a P 365 

It. >31. a P 219 

ft. 729 a P *97 

IL7S). a P 496 

JL 994 a. P 629 

IL679.a P*J7 

IL 862. a P 357 

IL *»). a Sl 12 537 

IL III 

IL Tiff a Si 22 *42 

II. 176. a P *62 

ft 5**. a Sl 1*917. a tat P 363 
ft 98). a: P 342 
0.703. a. P **3 
ft 1011 
P 424 

II. *ia A tar PKNfc 6 Sl 2) 41* 
P 133* 

P DU 

ILXtt.a V 12523 
IL684. a P4I2 
PIJJJ 
P 138 

AV 475: a. P 1274 
ft TOO. a: P 461 
P 45*. * Si 12.332 
ft V*. a. P 316 

IL tit. A Si 12522.* Si 566)2 
AV 477. a: P UW 
ft 86). a. * 123)9 
P 310 

ft 977.11) a ta* P36*. 

IL 895.12, a tat P S98. 
a St 174. (!) a. (2) a Si 12537 
P 39*. A bu JL 6)3. a St 18564 
P 170. a; Si 36;367 

IL 362. 6 St I *1*4 a tac P 1*0 
ft 7(3. a: P 516 
ft 392; a: PIC? 

ft 114. aP 653 
IL8H. a P647 
ft 301; a. P 2*7 
ft 48). a P279 
IL71I; 6 St 2L227. 
fl-915 

IL 385. a. Si 22*80. a btt; P »5* 

IL 484. 6 P 280 
ft 717; a P 4 59 
ft 306, a P 292 
IL 389. a: P 163 

0.65). a-St 12511 
IL I5L » P 64H 
P436 





DATA M-948 to M-II19 


437 


M-WI 

M-Wtt 

M-trtt 

M-USt 

M-ttJl 

M- 953 - 

M-* 3 * 


MW) 


a» 

1771 

mi 

I2&T 

iSM 

1M 

2.M7 

mi 


me ( 246 f, Mb ID 
DU B J.U HDSOJ 

m istj no«i 

1FK2SL2 MU 61.5 
bK md i»i 

DK7464 L,P-I7*J 

bxrucn MDJ« 

djcm** NDHFF^w 
I m sew musi.v; 


IT, W. H, Mil* 
JLTHcfccP544 
JJ HJl I! Si fc LSJHi 
Jl. T74 r x: Si, |tJJT 
P 243 . A 6 u IL 517 
P UTJ 

A: 51 9 *«T, 111 A Jl. 735; 
* JM JJ 7!,(U, hiM 
r ZSJ; i: 5a 11 Jin 
ILK**; 4: MAI 


MUST 

M- 95 H 

M-t» 

M9HT 

M-MI 

M962 

Mi -%1 

MSM 

M%3 

M.4QA 

M W 
Hdfl 
M*%9 


itCa 

IMt 

N’ 

IM1H 

I Ibi 

n>?ji. 

salt? 

im 

33JU 


SUSM* MD 5 » 

DX H5S3 MD i4T. fA.JH 
UK 221 'CD 340 
vs m mi/ v,* 

VS 93 S 9 MBJHltl? 
□KCJCH2 'ila 1*1, X)l4i 
t)K 1191 IIM [Jli 54 
UK 11*17 MD 1 4 . 2 , ,ffl IP 
TIH 5656 MO IDI.SJJTl 
UK 3«2 MllltS. 

MM 461 

DKA 7 S 3 TIM 13656 

ok my jmu ii.i 

DK 55 I* 510 'll JQ , 


Jl, 73 *. t NUT. pi ra w 
JL S»; iP& 
ILTll.iMdti 
P-H&«3t ifcsfc 
IL 495; a. Sl IUU 
P 14 lj A bai JL JH 
AVM1,cJ7M 
it. 53 ». i p im 
JUJ 3 ;*:}l I 2 : 5 » 

JL J9). a" Si IIJJT, 
ll»rT I Mi 
PH) 

JL 3 *?,* P 9 E 7 
P 16 k A; JL 144 


M V7I1 Jtlft 

M -971 1254 

M*b 2 235 T 
H 4 C 73 350 

M-UTJ 2 A 5 U 
Mfnj 22% 

44-976 13)1 

M9T7 U5W 
M-VCR 3117 
M-*» 356 * 

MM 23 J.T 
'l 4*1 U 2 LJ 
M*S 2 HD I 

M.WtJ I*&® 
M-MM III J 
MW 0|55 
MM* IJtil 
H-W IDOT 

M%( tUt 
44 WJ (HJf, 
MWG 3473 
M ? j\ 3301 
M-W) 346* 

M 993 1367 

MW JIM 
M -995 3 DI 5 
M.W6CH &f* 
ED 


M-*l Q 55 | 
M.WH 1176 

m <m hi; 

M MU 14417 

M- ton iau 
M-iDM om 
m men tjrj 
M-tQW fl »3 

M-llW, IDO | 
M L rob IJttM 
M-im 1EBJ 
M- 11)06 1 BJJ 
M ■ IQSt 2627 
M IT)IQ IfflS 
M -1 Di i new 
M -WU 02 W 
54-1015 1 / 74 , f 

M mi j IKS 

> 4-1015 0147 

HHItft 1341 
54 lilt) 1,100 
M- 10 TR 24 K 1 
M-IMI'T 136 * 
54-1020 M% 
541001 1299 

MJ 023 0110 

M-H 03 0145 

M'lHM 0541 
M -1025 0 S 3 J 
M-S(i 3 ft ijuo 
M IEHJ OK® 
M EQlR 36 TI 
M. EftS !£» 
M-EGEKT MJJ 
M. EOJI H 74 H 
M-tOJI JJ 17 


DK ] H 15 VILi T-U 
L 74J M»m»JEI 
DK *179 MD 730 
ItK SJ 4 I MPItftHCD 
DK STS 6 MEi U* 

DK 1106 MDJBJJ 7 . 

MM ITS 
ITU 5361 Mh J TO 

T.T MD S59, MJ(7 

UIHWI& 4 S* EXtt tV* 
DKR 463 Mil 5 |* 
m *M MD 315 
DJi 7754 5413346 

EMt HU* MEJ WWfl, 

MM 47.3 

I'lTOUli E:\B 1377 
HRW 7 Ml 1673 
DK-i 1066 MD 5 TO 
DK 17631 MD 566 
I IB * 110 MfllM- 

DK-mrrg' mduo 
rrt Mtibii 

DK 4073 MD 310 
DK UK* MD 736 
DK 6153 HDVVJJ. 

MM 47* 

DHL 3l'5M MD 321,51 Jf 
l>K IITf* MDM7 
UPHW&SII F-VB 13141 
DK 3 ff 76 'ED *13 
MU MI 

DK-H TO MD3TJ 
DK 11756 MD, MM * 7 ® 
UKSSW MDn* 
IJKJ 7 U 4 MD T 64 
HR 4054 MD. MM *46 
UKL 372 MO 6*3 
L VM MD 513 
UKbUJ Mil 661 
HR 4161 MD 701 
DK 1 . 36 J Mb (DO 
DK 644 * MD 493 

DK 55 « Mb 317 
DK 5215 MDSII 

nsrai md m 

J.'K 4 MTf Mb 461 
DK ATT* MDWI 
'!f* MD 411 

VS 3227 HD 37 J 
IWC-itM ME) * 4 * 

VS L 4 SR MD 5 S 7 
DH.-E 133 MD 363 
DK MD 763 

H 3 t 3 J 4 L MUboW 

DK «*H MD ATS 

lift 57 **, MD 64 # 

DK 7613 MD 7 B 4 

Wt-iW MD 6 T 4 
777 MODUS 

m 6Q31HH 

L 331 MII 4 i 07 

DK 115*3 MTiJO: 

DK HM* MH 3 J 4 
DK-EJ 4 S 4 MD 305 
DK l«JT MD 333 
5 DJ 17 T MD 7 S 3 
DK7U» MD4M 


JL fflfh i JTLM, pi. ku> 110 
II <m: * Si 11534 
IL 117 ; a: SL 212 II 

r 3 T3 . * *i . aim* 

fl- 4W: * Sl UiW 

iL 39J; t PJJ7 

IL 1LSJ7 

JLliiT.j r+4H 

jl m 

IL AA* Ml SI- 212.17 
JLT43C* F4®J 
PI7I 

JL. m, 4' P 143 
IL IH7 

P 3W.4 ft- UUt-t.tft* SL If 1ft 

JL 731, i. P 491 

JL T46 r II P 5CM 

|J> Ai AV UJ.llHtMl 

i Si. L2J» 

JL 77H l P 512 
U, 79£t i P53B 

P 315; A Ini JL MS: I: Si. I4 UA 
JL IU, i PAH 

JL 1K3; t P m 

IL 565. & P KH 
JLTftli* P WP 
IL 179 

P7LRL II) A bH. JL 11*31. 
JLfl|D,lDi P»3:tll. 11*44. 
A; 5i lillOS: A Ml: Sl 32?T75; 

IL 747; ■: SJ. 314T1 ■ Hi P 493 
IL 4(77.1; P Eft* 

PAJO. ft l~;IHlT t * Si tfcSHS 
IL 145; it Sl. 13:23 
P 205 

jl in ■ rsu 

n.«Ji a: ft 113>4 

P 591; A.- SI. 5:6633; A vs-. JL 89* 
JL *43; a P 5C» 

JL7M;i P5I! 

JL ft* I. a. 5111.5*7 
JLi7fci:P4» 

JL AAl;i: P lift 
PfrTO 

JL AH; a: P 1ft 
iL 733; i: PJILl 
JL 513; 390 

JL7*n* JU.2.11St»!ttt J'4H4 

H«T;«tP147 

JL 731. a. MH7. pi J11-34ft 

II. 361;* Pitt 

IL *16; i, SL.IJ 223 

JL R9Ch j-. 91.11-399 

ILTM; * P" Sin 

IL 912, ■: JL 1*317 

JLR29. A. A P All 

ILW;*p5« 

IE. 902; i. P5R5 
P 731 

ILliftcEk [2334: Q P 546 
P530; AK* IL 770; i S) 72-AKt 

JLAAO.icPiW 
ILJ'Ll, * P244 
JL 7 L«;*:ft 31*50 
IL. 172, j. P ft’? 

FI. 4.3*. a p *12 


M 11333 0095 

M-IttM J4AJ 

M Idas 

M- 1113 ft 4 Mri 
m Jin? asm 
M- HUS IE57 
U 10W fl0j 
M 1040 ZIMTJ 

M Itm ion 

M-S0J. 0335 
M-I&U 0547 
M7M4 1351 
M HH5 7447 
M t044 0319 

M-ED 47 UII 
M 1044 QSW 
M-LC49 BJ1 

M-mso n% 

M I nil 0265 
M im DCKPT 
M-LQ53 2163 
M-lftM 1MR 
M-HISf 2«a 
M-I1H6 0531 
M IftST 2S|» 
M • I1HS 1392 
M-HB7 01# 
H-IOftf) 1*97 
M Halt tm 
M I0ft2 HUM 
U I1*i.l 2157 
M 1064 1*92 

M 1063 2151 

M HIM 15*7 
M 1067 1496 

M 106* Wtf) 
M 9006 1WC 
MlttW 21M0 
M KfJI I4«N 
M JCCT2 14*5 
m im 1**9 
M JOT* 0562 
M-9E7T5 1*7*1 

M StTPfl. IWftl 
Minn 2359 
M-107JI 0217 

M IQ79 2fc5f 
M l I XU 1541 
M-I1XI 2129 
M-HH2 1349 
M UWJ 1)130 
M lit* 1316 
M-11JH5 1222 

M-IDH <023 
MI1M7 HU 
M-1114 226R 

M I Cm 7 lid 
M-JOQD 2675 
M lOJl 6174 
M 1092 13)2 

M-KPP3 2*67 
M iffu J2|{T 
M-IEJ93 3*?5 
M. 1(196 J4I11 

M-KPT fiU 

M-ID7I 150 J 
M-IWT IIE3 
ME1G0 2201 
M-II01 2*31 
MIIQ2 2009 
M- E 1(33 J3J7 


DK 7*16 MD 6KJ 

DK 3J4I2 MD 773 

IMlUM FAB 

3TP MDHW 

m '224 MD 637 * 
DK.C 392 MD54® 


IHC 36IA MH 50? 

77? 9ED WM 

HR5I7A MD759 

IIU 1 » MD S 56 

DK6W2 'ED623 

DKTS 42 MQ« 

DX l 112 V MD 6 T 2 

W M 1 T 4 W 

DK 5 M 9 Q MD 53 R 

UK 9 J 3 MD 534 

IIR 45 H 6 ? MDlJll 

UK-BlCin HD 74 *. 5 J 77 
DK 3656 MDJ-M 
DK *643 MIJ 7 T 5 
DK 7312 MSTO 
DK 4 AK 4 MDH 34 
DK J 74 H Ms 171 

VS 2049 MD 7 IT 

DK-j 603 MD IS 

VS ? 1 U UDriTfl 

m TM6 'ID «s 
DK 10973 MD 591 

DK 3 *m MDT 45 
Crti 39 fl MD *76 
DK II 9 DL MD 501 
HR 5 * 7 * MDA 36 
D Am MD'/flO 

DK 5173 MD R 90 
DM 72 MJffl 

DK 33*4 MD T 7 B 
DK-Oftft* MD JUS 

i lit * 4 , 1 * MDlVl 
T 7 t MD RftS 0 

?n MD MAI 

ID 33 5 AID 715 
f?T MD 135 

DK 6345 MD 300.3117051 
DK AS 4 M MD 547 
C1K TOftfi NMP50JJ2 

LTR 3 NVfPSDIAl 

DK I 1 W 9 t„ P- 177 * 

DK C I3°3 Mb&Ki 
JJK- 1%1 MDJKl 
LWM MU 129 

m 431 * Mb 163 . M 237 
DK 1337 JMD ») 

HE SHP 50239 

DK 12775 L. P- 17.1 J 
VS 59 MD 330 
DK *791 L. P -1726 
DKillftO L, P 1721 
VS 3909 MD * 30.13 J 3 

DK 79 I 3 AID *®4 
PK. 115 S 6 MD 637 
DX. 4311 MblftS. 14 *44 
PK BCBR MD 3 ») 

PX 3522 MQ M}47. 

54 M 4 RR 
TlX *2 JftJ 4 MD?M 
V5 2543 503646 

QK12EMP SOPWA 
DK R 37 i MD 703 . JJ J* 
UK HUD) MD693 
DK B %■>: NMP 30 . 33 * 


M- 1 LD 4 1335 

M l MU iJi.il 

M-1 List. 233 E 
M 1107 2»6 
M IHM E339 
SLIHW 1327 
M l EEL) I3M 
M llll E 333 
M-l L 12 2366 
MINT 24*1 


>IK 2fiJ7 MDTD 
DK 12230 MDM2 
DK 1224 MD4V9 
DK I26W U P-1747 
DKJ1I7 NMPMJ37 
DK.C3JT3 Mb 74* 

TIK E ES*6 MH 44S 
VS, RKJA NMP 50 J43 
DK 12*77 MD 43ft 
PKilSt MT‘30.’#. 


PfHK A bi«: JLWJ 
JLJWK * PW 
IL PUT 

JL Ml;*. PTD6 
JL, 7T7: * P SJ* 

IL 701; k. P 44* 

JL IWI 

JL IS* 

ILUfLi M Ef lCfr 

JL9TJ 

JL Rftft. j. P 66* 

JL 713 *; « Si 17 : J JT 
JL 3!T|; ■: Si II 59T 
P 390. A Hi fL 
JL^nft.a. P.564 
JL 11IA 

JL TOP. a. SI. L>:5*n, ilu P 44.2 
P*«. A bH: JLTUii 14 13:71) 
JL JIH! 

JLST9-. a. P M3 

jtm a, p *43 

JL.UU.t P 666 

PA2LA lih: ILM1 1. SL i$Mi 
JL 9 56 

P Ml; A Mi B: IL 1023 
JL S24, * Si 12J*0. □ P H4> 

JL 9*1 

4L«9:6-M U tl 

IL MR: a Sl 12:51®, ■ Hi P5SA 

JL fla.* P*rr 

JL H&t- il P64J4 

II. HAS, i MIC, fL tii*m 

JL IWiAiiPW 

IL 771; m: SL LUI* 

JL 1DH; i- P730 
JL«T, a, jlP JJ(T 
IL VTH; mi P 550 
JLMI .4 PA57 
1L90J. t PT17 
JL 971 . * PTD 
JL IDIQf a; P 74* 

IL 1113 

JLAJL* fo D » 

JL LOST: a: P 729 

Pitt t Sl IRJS7, A bn: IL JR! 

p *51; A tm. P JL ft** 

Pita 51. It+'iJ, A hi. IL 13 
JL IL. a: Si IH14 
AV *71; A. i P ISO 
JL 936 ■ P *59 
JL *15. 6 P IH 
JL STJ; ai P 121 
IL STB. a. Si 12 556 
PJ7J, ■; ft. H.1E7 
IL 7; a SL IU3J 
AV *7*. a: r 12ft3 
IL 5M, r Si. JU*6 
P ISM; A Inc AV 476 
AV*7Ka PJ2A9 
JLftJl, i SI. LUIS 
31,673:* PDi 
JL 91K, x PS®’ 

JL 497 , * St H:S» 

JL SOT; x St Il:m;xln«r P3I7 
JL 430, j F J IS 

JL R7J: m MPT.pl txi.W] 

n.Vfil * P3I3 

JL66J. j 3’422 

JLHfcir 9 t I 2 ID 

IL9J7; a P «K 

AV 592. A. ft. 3 ftftl* 

a. MU’, p. a.i.,337; .Hi, Il V A\ 

Jl-936. a: Si. I2J44 

P7&L \ ftii. D Jl 1003 

P*Ul A bt, Jl. roll 

AY4AL a So. ll Ul 

JL 25; a: P 13 

JLiSl, 6 ft JUB 

JL 5*5 i: p D* 

JL 2*; t P 21 
Find 

IL M3: a: P LEU 


M ILL* Dll VS 3093 

M-L 115 D» PK Ml 
M-1116 ESI* ILK *1*R 


IMD257L 
«)• *6 KHP 
Mb 642 
L. P-1729 


M-l 1 TTED 2613 
CZJ 

m 

M l U# 23 fw 
M-l 119 2*55 


DK 74169 MOTOR 
MU 77* 

Mb 191 

1 !*VMn- 33 ® EXB 1371 
DK 7722 Mb *32.33 47 


JL IMfcrFK? 

P 54 * 

P UTSt x Si. DJJT. 
A M. AV #73 
JL W, iij i p6?n 
JL 155, |Zi m . P 664. 
JLlWc ■: Sl llftlft 

il m 

ILW.lP 359 








438 


DATA M-l120 to M-1277 


M-1120 2363 
Mini 1*21 
M-1122 2610 

MI123 2333 

M-II24 2330 
Ml 125 0577 

MII26 2332 
M-1127 26% 

MII2* CT2M 
Ml 129 DOS 

Ml 130 0655 

MIDI 1354 
Ml 132 134) 

Ml 133 1343 

M 1134 3651 

M-tl3S 2140 
M-II36 0114 
M 1117 2531 

MID* 1344 
M l DO 1341 
Ml 140 21U 

MIDI 2169 

Ml 142 224) 

M-1143 1363 

Ml 144 D64 

Ml 143 1371 

M 114*0)1)74 
< 2 > 

Ml 147 IJ73 
M-1146 2540 

M 114V DM 
M-l 150(111534 

(2) 

Ml 151 1533 

M-l152 1349 

MII53 227* 
M 1154 1362 


MI155 2573 

M 1156 1370 

M-1157 2110 

M 115* 2223 

M-l 139 2m 
M I 160 2057 

M-l 161 2504 

M-l 162 205* 

M-l 163 26KI 
M 1164 2665 

M 1163 2064 

M 1166 1351 

M 1167 2464 

Ml 16* 2M0 

M IIM1 2024 
M M70 13*2 

M 1171 2«U 

M 1172 1126* 
M H73 ll«| 
M 1174 0344 

m iiismim 
12) 

M 117* 244J 

M 1177 2450 

M 1171 2539 

M 1174 2 HW, 
Mllttl I Kll 
M I HI 2222 
M 11*2 0512 
M-IIS) 2454 
M 11*4 1352 

Ml 115 1353 

M 11*6 2430 
M 11*7 0151 

M HU 222* 
M IIHM l M6 
M 1140 255* 

M 1141 t 4*4 
M 1142 1445 

m i i4i ;«n 

M 1144 0502 

M 1145 21*1 

M-l146 14*1 

M 11«7 0201 


DK 7024 MO 513 r 423. Abie fl. 672; a; SL 22:445 

DK-E220 IIMSiaSJOM 9 1244 
DK 1472 MO 537 7L 703;» P 447 

OK12t3S <MO 156.51241) It 1150. » T 236 


mm in KHP 

hi mm tmu i 

m 540*71 

DK 12154 MD $36.574! 
SO 2647 NMP 50.770 
DK 12716 MD 747.36277 
04( 3205 MD 149.5044 

MO 6436 EXB 
LMO MO 301 
HR 2022 MD 516 

HR 4433 MD50273. 

MM 413 

OK 7462 NMP 50273 
DK 5462 NMP 50272 
OK-l 223 MO 703.35 64 
OK 7150 MD 6*7 
DK-C 2*53 U IMH7B 
L 3*6 MO 437.3)13 
OK 11340 MD *46 

DK 1127) MD5J.fr. 

MM 4*2 

DK *231 MO 433.061 
OKU 10* MDM6 
5712676 MD 661 
DK-C 2053 MD 593 
HR 4353 MD *75 
MD 652 
VS 1116 MDMIt 
OK 5*4* MD 151.33264 

DK-C 673 MD 777 
DK 1543 MD 30261. 

MM 4*3 
MOWS 

VS 665 NMP 50271 
DK-C 3S3 L MOB 

DK 54 .14 MD 430.55 M 
DK-E 1651 MD 741 


IL M6. r S3 21452 
IL 1007 

rittAto IL 607. ■: 5* 22:440 
a* a POI 
IL 171.1 P 645 
All *451: (I3A.IL 527. 

* SL 12124 
Vickie 

IL 670; i 5c 12:954 
IL 737: ■: P 466 
IL 442: ». p 104 

XV <93. A P 04. a: St 11.595 

ILIR.aPW 

fl-446; • P6I3 

IL 141: c P $56 

AV 467, * P 1312 

P 366 A IL 606 a SL 12 534 

a FfM pt tiu*l. |M: (I) A. 

(II a P745; (I) A to IL 4*2 
P I Ift A ha IL *4* a Sl 224*0 

n. 343. a P 349 
IL 154. a p 5)2 
a <64. a Si 12:540 
IL 732: a S3 12 )46 

a 1016 

a. <43. t Si 12:517 
a 764, a SL 12:550 
K ft. 22 470. A Me P 251 
A hr JL 315; a Si 11592 
a 131: a P 659 
A- Sl 9:434. (11 A: a 441, 

(II a Si 12.516 lilt tu P 106 
(2) A IL 974.(2) a 51 1321 
P 14 

PI11P.AM1 AV 466 
i MIC. pi cm V* 
a 60* » p 340 
K Si S66J>. A bu a 122. 
a MIC. pi. ctb 362 


DK 7516 NMP 502*6 

HR 5611 UP-1734 

DK 1112* MD 246.3533 
DK 113*4 MD 674 
DK 11502 NMP 30 2*1 
DK 10346 MD 3.33 
DK 5925 MD 161,36253 
OK 11434 MD 36367. 


A: Si 22 435. A Me a 13 
a Si 11:615. • bu P 4d 
P 12*6 a Si I2J35 
P 276 A he IL 441: a Sl. 22449 
a *76 a P 567 

P 36 a SL 22441 A hr AV *40 
a 356 a Si. 22433: ihiPIU 
P 227 

P 117. A he a 439 


UK 6642 MU 4M 
OK MTV MD6I4 
OK 4671 NMP 50 OUl 
OK-C *27 UP 1730 
OK 63*5 MO 731 
OK 12*47 NMP 50293 
OK 126** NMP 56292 
L MU NMP «> 294 

UK T7.34 NMP 5(0*4 
OK 7340 MO T73 
VS 255 MD 4*9 
rr MD66! 

ONE 1277 MO 641, II () 
MD114 
OK *253 MO Alt 


DK 6656 U P 1727 
DK 744* MO 772 
OK 4114 NMP VI241 
OK C 240 MOWWfll 
OK 12050 NMP 30 296 
DK 11334 MU6I4 
OK 7342 NMP 3031 
HR 444*1 MU 53$ 3)«; 
OK O 392 NMP 5032 
OK 6647 NMP N< 31 
DK t 1019 MD. MM 4W 
DK IIM63 MD 5*0 
11* 1676 MD 792 
OK 7447 MD 442 
OK D 171 Ml) IV* 
l)K li*4 MOM* 

OK *:«V MO. MM 520 
DK *167 MO 1ST 
OKI 1442 MD36J34 

OK C Hi MO *74 
DKJTI U P 1716 


a 615; a SL 13)47 
it 761. P $31 

a Hj.aPa 

AV 414. • Si 12 31* 

P 665. A he a *74 
IL 3. a P II 
P lft A h. AV I 
a 4. a Si 12)34 
a 6 A. a P 05 
JL *5). a P 667 

P 402. A bia a 432. a Si 13:30 

a 1020 

ft **S: 4 0aP97*. 

IL 464. (2> a PT13. A. SL 56633 
IDA a 403. ill a P $77. 
a SL 12216 
AV 474; a f 1266 
IL *51. ■ P 66* 

a II. a V 21 251. • fan- *21 

IL 4*6 a P 276 
AV *17, A. a P 36 
ft. 9**, A. a P 704 
AV *** A. a P 32 
a 71*. a P <0 
P 30 

ft. 26. A.. rn». a ft ia eon 

P 121b r IL 441 

IL 736 a P4T7 

a 05c a 54 12)17 

a 613. A. a P 345 

a 7)». ipip 

a 1106 a P 710 

a*Ua Si 21 SIS.ah. f 220 

a 1063. a Si. 21 214. a hi P 727 

a 421. a: P 221 

ft. (Hit A. a P 740 

P 1271 


MtlW 14*2 HR 1400 MOM.Wt. 

M-l MW 2520 OK 1563 MO .M2K 
MM 556 

M-1200 02)1 DK 12146 MD733 

DK 75« MD 605 


M-l 201 
M I2Q2 1325 DK 2797 

M 1203 101* MR 1*04 

M 120* 2095 DK 1300 

M 1205 124) HR 4624 


U P1T44 

NMP 30211 

MD32I 

MD3I7 


M 1206 2224 DK tl<6 NMP 50.253 


MUD7 02*4 
Ml 201 1256 

M 1206 1314 

M 1210 Xi*6 
M 1211 R540 

M 1212 0524 

m mi am 

M 1214 Q553 

M 1215 11212 

M-I2IA 1625 
M 1217 0513 

M till 0*32 
M 1214 mu 
M-l 220 0543 
M 1221 0136 

M 1222 I2M 
MI22I t)J* 
M 1224 1227 

M-1225 1)11 

34-1226 1326 

M I22T 2135 
M- 122* |3W 

m- 1224 am 
MI230 1356 

M-1231 2321 
M 1232 2697 

M-1233 2152 


OK071 MDHU 
HR 4| 12 MD 4 W 
DK E 1412 MU M2 
UK 1212) 30 

HR 103* MDR47 


DK 5*54 MD <79 

SO 1*64 30)912 

DK 6124 MOM 

VS 34*0 7 3IDVU 

OK 11471 340915 


OK 11*61 
HR 6417 
DK 1645 
OK C 162 
DK-C 310 
L 323 
HR 4») 


DK 209 
OK 4013 
DKC3IM 
OK 11550 
OK 797 
OK 123M 
DK *230 
DK *137 


MD VI? 

MO 316 
MO 579 
N34P 50.215 
N34P 111 214 
MO 3*251. 

31.M **? 

MO 132.5024* 
MO 664,3154 
MD *47 
MD741 
MU *41 
340 650 
MD?*V 


M-1234 212* DK 11745 MD654 


M 1215 im 
M lit* 144) 
M-1231 021$ 

M1231 2311 


M 123* 2550 

M-l244) J729 

M 1241 0756 

M-l 342 2614 

34 1143 1304 

M-1244 15)4 

M 1343 0510 

M-l 346 0*56 
M-L247 0130 


DKR71I 
OK 6746 
OK 3*10 

DK 5*14 
DK 7905 

m 

DK7T56 

HR 5593 

HR 1964 
DK 11241 
IPM.MU4W, 
OK • $13 


MD»au 
34DHU2 
MD VJ 
MDJCJW. 
MM 324 
MD3634, 
MV 523 
NMP 

MO. MM 327 


MM 526 
34DJ6JI7. 
34M323 
U P -413 
NMP 50 371 
EXB 1364 
MOJRJC. 


a 405: a P 206 

a 434. A P 196 
|«TR 4<71 
a«7ft aCc:P64» 

P 356. A bu a ?«* 

AV 4*7. a P 1361; Aft 12511 
Pft7. A. R AV 4. a St 12.534 
a 5*5. a P 3412 
a *•$, a ft 12537;c. t POP. 

E 311C pi ait) 

a I*. A.C.P Si 21^57-. a P1L 
A VSLp 190:151. '(IE ft 21 230 
a *21. a P 654 
IL 544. a P 361 
a Ml a MlC.pl nu lM 
a 1036. a SI 22 442 
IL 943 

a*» 
a no* 

ft. 1033 

a 454 

a 1039 
a 103* 
a 457 

a 665; A P 410 
a 1037 

a 55*. a P 34» 

a ?e. a p <44 

IL I. A Sl i*633. a ft 12550 
P IJ32. Ale, a »i 13)34 
IL 434. A. a k P 114 

P 2)3. A: a 504. a SL 12.530 
a*6i a.pm 
a 1070: a ft 12.5*5 
IL 177; a. P 647 
a 422; 1*717 
P 72fc B: a 106* 

IL 112. a ft 21211 
a 1064 tbc.i.l ft 21 214. 

6 ft 22 4*4: ■ he b he E P74* 
a 1065. e h. 4,r ft 22 446 
a ht. O P 72* 

a MV a P 732 b.c Si i*5»6 
a *34 a: SI 12341 
a 1022 

P 125: a Si 14 29ft A hr a 797 
a 45ft. A P 116 


P 1340 

a* 4 ».a fill 
IL 444 

a 455. a P 141 

AV 461. A P 1110 
a Me a P 3* 
a 171 

a 452: a P 143 


M-1246 (RSI 
M 1249 1501 

M 1330 atm 
M-I2SI isn 
M 1252 1521 

M 1«3 OSU 
M 1254 1621 

M 1255 07M 
MI2S6 0791 
M 1257 0*7* 

M-1231 2D0I 
M 1254 2649 

M-l 260 2703 
M 1261 U1M 
M-1262 2301 
M 1363 1341 

M 126* 

M 1265 2227 
Ml 26* I47Q 
M 1267 i« 
M-I2M 22*, 
M 1269 0121 

M 1270 I4M 
MIZ7I 2M13 
M-1272 14$7 

M 

M-I274 2106 
M 1273 2176 
M-12T* 2*21 
M 1277 0154 


MR 272* MD50J66, 

MM 521 
DK-B 1065 MD779 
OK E 1723 UP-91IA 
VS 1276 MO *23.56JS 
DK 1712 7 MDII3 
VS 5459 UP 1717 
fff MD 342 

VS-A 13a EXB 
17WWMI EXB 
DK 10436 NMP 50373 
DK 64IJ NMP 30 367 
SO 3130 UP«» 


IL 1*9 

a 4Sll a. Sl 12:334. a ha P 124 

aiSKa pan 

XV 461, a ft 12 541 
» a 1011. a P 712 
a 955 

P 1272. a SL 12:515 
P 303 A a 362 
frmr6a i«K4. pt 3 
VSL p 272. C 73 
at a P 31 
at A.«P29 


OK 113 

NMP 50 3*1 

P 33. » a 4 

DK 460) 

NMP 50304 

AVIHaF 3) 

DK C 31 

MO 311 

IL TMt. a P 476; a ft 1233) 

HR 1050 

NMP 30J41 

AV I. a P52 

DK 4741 

NMP 50 )11 

a 46. A P47 

HR 4237 

NMP 30.349 

a 44. a p 50 

OK 9)1 

MD 393,3372 

a 609. a P 3)2 

OK 5476 

NMP 501(4 

a *5. a r si 

DK i 370 

U P-1733 

XV 417. a P 12*4 

HR 4109 

NMP 50. Ml 

IL 47, a St ItlW 

OK 5567 

NMP 50.315 

a a. a p 44 

VS 3551 

M0 35KJ6J5* 

a 543. aft 122113 

OK 7W| 

N MP 50324 

a 43; a P 46 

DK 11177 

NMP 30 336 

a 4t a p 4) 

ITHMO-Zl* EXB 1)« 

a ii7 

OK 5*20 

MO 351. XU It 

P 306 A hi: a 549. a Si. \MH 

DK . IQ57 

MDJJ75. 

P 193: A: a 424 









DATA M-I278 to M-1436 


439 


M-12TB 2IKS DK363I Mdl (ft, II 423: ■; P ITS 


m 5767 

dr may 


W-tITV Q5» 

mimo tm 

H12I1 12fift 
M-l 2*3 fll *b Jl»i-ifr33 
M 1283 0134 OK j V,H 

M-lJlU 2*77 OR 5755 

33 

M-J'jHll |)22fH DR 3017 

33 

HW («l 
M E2TT 1454 

ml m dr ]35>» 

M128V 1432 flKhjMl 

M 1741 1*63 


L-JVl 


VS 953 


HD41I 

MD7» 

MDiSfr 

MDlBBLTC.'Dft 

MD5I3 

'ft? b 1 6 

VI1 MM AN 

L P-ITJT 


DIIIT 
UK M5'J 
DR V,34 
DR 1MJ 
SD IM2 


M-iasi 

M.39? rw 

M-l 295 BU 
Ml 294 n»l 
M-1293 145* 

M 32W 02*1 SD2H05 
M-I297 1445 L*S0 

mi3sb twi 
M-EPW 1436 DK C3£H 

M IXD 23311 m em MU TP* 

M -1 Vjl 0131*1 DK i %i Ml) W 
M43M MM OR BUD *101=3 
M ID? I«JH DK C |I14 MDTVJ 
M-l 304 142.) DR-d 203*1 MOKfl 

M ITO 22J9 OK 4371 KMT AM 


MDiwi 
MOJO? 
Mil 313 
MQnJjh 
L Mill 
MDhZft 
140*33 
MD609 
L MU 


M !»■ 14*1 HR 112) 


MS 307 IKX1 


MD ifllM. 
MM *37 
SIDIMU, 


A. 1033.«! P752 

JL PTJ, A: 1*77 V. j Si l2JJft 

n. ten. *: pst# 

JL6*6::t:P4IO 

4 to M 3H>, 

1IM A.«N,^i POJT 
JLK4, 111 4 P5EU. >. Si.33-:43ft 
ILTOt 12 1 4 P494 
JLTJlf to 1253V 
IL JSfh ■ Si ] 1:514 
p OT. 4 JL MJS 
JL -ill; 41 Sl [3:540 
AV 4*& A Si, 4,445. 

A Im: P UG, 4 to 1233ft 
ft, BYT; a. F5BH 
ILW:» SI IJ S3* 

JL t«60. u FEW. pi sot JSA 
JL 7*4. A P Ml 

AV 505: A: Si. |.«M. c Si 12:53(1 
JLIOCfti Mil 
JL 7*4; a: to 12:534 
PL 77?. 1 : P 54? 

AV left A 5 i. 5:6627. 

e u, n $?i) 

IL Stll; 4 P 351 
IL fa*; * P'5&? 

1L 7«A,i P52« 

A 847. » Si. 1255(1 1 411“. PSffl 
iL7H.fr, 1 . S| 13.55ft 
JL JH: r t 44 
7*214 

JL«Ii.5t JI5U 


At 13CM Jiwr 
54-1309 

M i Mn mi 

Ml 511 M*J 
M 1313 23 IN 


5DW54 

[JRTiUjS 

DIE C II? 
DK 51•« 
OR MCI 


M-TlfJ 2D93 OK iielM 


MD1H.J0.TU JL V*; I P J10 
AID 3t>0. S*72$ JL 155. m. 3* JOT 
NMF yj 299 JL J7; «, P >4 
JL J.W.* MJS 
P 3l» 

JL 4ISV ■ P J(» 


m K.ta 
DV 5577 


DK-B V37 
UKLHMJ 


M-1314 HJfr 
U IJU J.141 

M I -UA 

Mini «NX*. 
MUIt 1 1 It. 
M I ‘IV PlhJ 
M i *20 1447 

M-1321 (44a 

M I U3 11731 

MILLOIUUBA 

Q\ 

M4JM I6H3 
M Mis 3I1H 
M 133 ft (1557 
M 1527 I -OIK 

u-sjjj ;-h?i 
*t 153V Uin 
M U3d M OM 


MtSU IMD1 DR 1 LI 


DK 12175 

OK IIHNlT 

DK I23Mi 
OK SR U 
r»K 7V3I 
SDI725 
DM. 1535 
UK 447| 

dk riur: 


MD JOJttP. 
MM J] J 
M&IPJJD, 
MftfjlJ 
MDJP.«J 
MDMJP?. 
MM IQ 
am* min 

AMP S1.3*M 
MtiAJU 
AID 5H1 
VI. ’ JH 

MDAl! 

MD.IlUJ?. 

V M 3*H! 

MD 535 
VD.ns 
ME) ft) I 
MD377 
MD.fMft 
MD77I 


P4I; AL« JL 35; a S* 2J:4$J 
JL 53; 1 P Jfr 
p 514, * SL 13.533 
JL 725; i f 507 
A SI H4J5,. Si, 12.AW, 

|i) A: JL 75S 
JL W 4 . Si 12537 
P2J3: ■: 5i 7Z:4*f4h 
C, E. II. 4 *4 
P 405 

JLTMit P54I 
IL ?54,* PAIS 
Jl. 75ft. 1 P 34U 
. P6TT 


Ml? IV: AIM nMjL Jlr,. i P215 

DlSJ.Wiir IL 574: ■ P M, 


M-tIJS U34 

m iiHimin 
m 

M-T33JL J07; 
M n.i* 2515 
M-I3D 303J 
M-i.m auft 
Ml 335 3015 
M l MO LWi 
M J 341 2093 

M 1142 |J*1 

M I M3 1411 
MJ1*J 2515 
M IMS 027(1 
M i MS Q351 
MtJ47 0274 
*r 1 ms fiVhi 
MLi« 3»J0 

m-lsm im 

M 1351 3142 

M 1543 D*w 
M-13U I4JW 
M I1J4 E4VS 
M 13SJ 3.1*11 


L JK J7.M 

Dk nail 
OK 5*11 
DK 332V 
UK !W$ 
OK 10554 
DK 1143 
DK.KW7 
ILK 3E3U 
Hit 4135 
DK L255I 
D«4gr73 
777 

PK 5WMI 

LIE. H RH3 
DK 10355 


JL Htt. ■: P 67V 

IL 1015 .« PPM, p* lutMHtUlk 

tlluflU 

P 7ID 

IL T79; i; Si It34li 

JLSWJtrllA PATH 

JL 7WL (.21 j. F 5J4. t Si J 1:290 

JL I(I 7 A n: P 714 

JL frl L:e St !B5«fc (2i h: P592 

JL 797 , Ai P J 4 J 

JL fri 1; a: P 5frl 

JL *17. * P 

AV 447. i. St. L4 2HV 

IL 425, 4- P 177 

JL 427. a P3M 

JL $53; r. St 315.11. B. C: P «Vfr 
IL AIL r. PTE 
JL [017 


V5 20R 
0KE2KA 


MD-WJW, 

MM ?N 
AtOnE 

MDTVft 


MD«W 
MD63J 
MUean 
MD653 
t*. P-V(lft 
MD, MM 4«M 
MD MM 495 
MOW 
UD.MM49V 
HDH45 

MD WD, MJJ7 JL. Vii. A. j P 734 
340 HA* II. IlSJfi 

MD W IL IOW 

MD. MM 439 IL 436. A. i 6J*C P 111, 
*. b Si. 3 £ 4 VI 1 
MO J*a J 1 JJ 25 rL 567 ; i: P J 71 
IL 41H, «:P 17J 
0. m-35 A, 1 pur 


MO. MM 51* 
AH1«3 
MU. MM 516 

MD»m 

MS). MM 517 


P7,y 

IL *13: At P 214 


M 1356 27137 

M 1177 E4ft 
M JlSi 0150 
M-USV 2515 
VI j 3fdr 1443 
MrSNsi 1474 
54-1563 3230 

U-l*3 3772 

STsVw 3543 
Mli&J 365* 
M E»6 30V4 

M-LWiUMAI 

El* 

M I If* XMif 
M 136* 1471 

M-J370 ilffl 
M-J57I mb* 

M-I57I (IMS 
M i in orK 
M-15T4 3H«3 

M im 1560 
M-I5R6 IT7V5 
M-im I17SW 
M, 1711 U796 

M-lflV IJW7 
M-L5M 0U1 
M [3*1 1559 

M.-L3S3 3171 

MT3KJ TO 
M-13H4 Dill 
M-l 3*5 flfiJJ 
M l IRA 1563 
M-l 3*7 3761 

M-iSft nti 

M 1.1fifr 3634 

M JMO «*tl 
M-1391 37* 

MJW3 314* 

M im iw» 

m 0*37 

M-E795 1741 

MFjW. 1566 


M-tTW 2723 
M I KA i fftl) 
M-I*W 1563 
M 1400 27AI 

M. 1401 ni> 
M-140Z 15R6 

M-l 4113 0256 

M IJfH- OMV 
M 14U5 2751 

M J 406 2740 

M-1407 1577 

M 14I MS 1710 
M 1«N 0*52 

U 141ft 3S10 
M ill I 0517 
M 1412 KJI 
M-1415 USUI 
At. 1414 0*71 

M 1415 JJ3J 
M-ulft Ell 
Ml *17 J522 

MI4i«mi)l6 

m 

M-14IV T173 
M-L4JJ 2177 
M t*Ii IJI7 
M-r«I 2733 
M-L421 OJBft 
M-142* 130(12 

M-i 43 .J ms* 

M.-I426 151] 

«-t*n 2771 

M-I4J* I7H 

M-L439 3S7S 
M-I43Q 1714 

MINIS Ill!i 

U-142.2 I53M 
M-143-1 1576 
M 1414 1151* 

AJ-1435 »76 

M-143* (BOA 


SD37J2 NMP 
DK 124-tii 54D624 

M-l 1013 MOTM 
DK 6**» MDIU 
HU R34* MD16T 
DK-DI6J MDTSir 
DK J 246 a MR, Mftt 496 
DK lilt MD.MM49I 
DK TV# MD MAS JO > 
DK W5ft KMP 303*6 
0R4MUI MO .K 1 1 JO. 

MM *91 
OK *t*ft KID7*0 
Atom's* 

Vl 7R4e VMP 5(1555 
VS 5017 MD4II2 
0% 3*49 AH? §61 
OK 1 1 \r*t VtD S22fli;, 
MM 32fi 

L lit NMP 5344JT 

DK-iBE NMP53J4JV 
LiPMJMDIW EJCft - SHI 
VS 2269 NMP 513901 
VS HE il-atlft. E-Vft 
V5 E H3-N35 EXE 
DSAJ.MI7 exe 
1 p>F. SHiCK exh 
mwicmii fixs 
L 515 MD5ft.V2.7WI 
umw-i EKD I m 
MN Sl> LXD 
777 FXP 

777 MOiifiL»Jla 

IJR C llftj Ml)7U7 
DK. 642fl U P-IKJJ 
DK 7679 VMP 50400 
DK If 16 MD WW 
MM3E» 

DK *4*9 VMP 50 4(12 
DK 42tifi NMJ* $Cl Alt. 
DK 12257 MD10AV 
MM 4*1 

DK 413* NMF 50.345 

□K 5154 NMP 
OR DWJ NMP Xi.363 
DR- E 113 MlHil IW 
MM 53 & 

DR laws L P-1722 
OR *53ft MDHJl.jriiy 
3D I9E VP 1721 
DK*t?$ MDJfridJ. 

AIM 514 

nxiuif Momstsfis 

HR 22M i, P-1721 

777 MOH43 

DK-E43S VD*4ft 
DJC766J UP-1150 
UK IMP MDRISlIJJ^ 
HRJJIJ MDJUI 
DK TOOT LP-E719 
DK JO*it SMP 
DK 7W*s MD JG7 r MJtt 
DK 122*4 MDIJ* 
DK5660 UD*» 

DR 10215 MD *7cl 
DK 12535 MDRE 

DR 4JIDA Nftd' VI 56J 

DK 7H92 NMP 
VSfr2l! MDA3V 
HR 5971 MD 171, 

mM sJi.snit' 
MD7U 

DR 11439 VP17EI 
DK7147 MD Hill 
DK 1331 MD (13 
DK619H MDHL7 
W MD ION 

DK. a A I* X UP Sft *9.1 
DK 11677 AMP 
UR-E LNIU 
DK l#Tft MD 4i*L 57 AM 
DK 0*74 MD 33 #5, 
mm m 

iihAiiti-ftffJ Exa 
DARK! MD 77277, 
MM5U 

DR 11513 MD V,*T7 
MM 511 

Hft 33a SMP 
DK-E491 UDfJS.MJW 
DK jy*ft VtD N36 
777 HiAVtTA] 

MN-E Hi LX.Q 


ft. 3ft. R P 26 

ILT*5: A- P52li 1 : Si. 22:459 

IL137. A 4 P 693 

JU. 571. A. 4 . L P lit 

IL (44: i: SL J2 539 

ILS42; ■. PMift 

Jl. 4JA I P 116 

JL 421; A t P 119 

Jl, *2ft ft. 1.1 P El 

JL 44: i. 6: P 72 

JL 4E. t: PUS 

JL H57; 

JL 1*6; 4 SL 1111$ 

P5B; K JL 74 
P ML A; JL 507 

JL 1DE1; A ilk P 716, e Si Ir, FA# 
JLIOLArlj: P7WJ 

rm 

P IB); A (2): JL 'M 
Jl M* 

JL Ml A (2[, P lUu 
JL 152. A (lit AbIscc 
A jriicn; A JL (tf 
Ji m. A e. hi W(m 
lit 1*1 

il m 

JLA« 

JLlW 

AKrtea, A (IK VSI. p 777. C77 
VSl. p. 201:171 
JL 685 
JL927 

AY 301, A P 1295 
AV 3 
JL 451 

AY 111; A B.Pw 
P 75. A. SI (4JB3 
ILSB7 

Pill A:It IMftfc 
Aha: 5i 1429ft 
P 13M,AiSl 13.624 
JL 41; A SL 21:429; A hit p 10 
ft. 411 


AV30I 
JL 1068 
AYttfl 

Jl 793. A: 51 2*216: E P 111 

JL IDMi: A: ii 21:210 

AV 47ft. 4 B Ms MK". [J mi 76, 

A Hit P ntXi. B;Si 9.452 

IL IOE 

JL 1004 

AV 303 

JL 9811. 8 11 24 JJfr. A p 701 
IL-V>3kfc Si 12:557 
AV‘ 504, A PI29I 
P UK 

JLfrfti 

JL983 

ILSW2 

JL 99ft. A: P719 
IL»I 
JL 40 

p 13,57, A to 2J.4M 

ELS9I 

JL 462: 

A 5L Llift, ft- 5, 91-MI 

JLRJS 

AV SOT 

JL**J. A, It Ss ittJK 

JL Ift 19 

Jl. Wrf 

JL 1104 

Jl. 31, A Hi, B (in: P 55 
P U3* 

AV4M 

JL 301 

IL 471; B, C ha. f 12); 

C- Si IH -673 

□■Ju Lft61. P . W 

IL 471; A bit B_ C: P lit 

A to- 22 -sW, U'tfaktt; SI. 24419 

IL 7Y5; A. fl, C, f; p | L( 

P U41.f-f.Si. 12,311 

11.966. i-J Si 12:541 

JLV37 

AVft 

IL VM 










440 


DATA M-I437 to M-1611 


Ml«7|l)0592 WtCJUft MOOT* IL >07*. (Uk f 70S; 

(2) MD78* JL«2I; <ljli P656 

M UM 0107 OK. 89 MO 621 IL 77). A. • P 533 

M MW OMO MR 1693 MD77k a Mb 

M 1440 2.174 DK 31137 V©«1) «. 97* 

MUII 0529 DK 3346 MD. MM M* II. «*,.!»») 

M 1442 DI4I OKtlflDl MD WJ4J. P 300 

VMS)* 


M 1441 0271 OK 3793 Wnil 


XL 654, t P ML! 


M 1444 21* UK VA1 

MIMS 2303 DK 3671 

M-1444 0330 "7 

MIM7 07*4 DK 4211 
M 1448 0423 TT 

M I4W I *07 HR 3741 
M 1450 1301 VS 3411 

M >431 0134 DK 4MO 

M 1433 2SI5 DK MI7 
M 1431 0*¥l ft 

M 1434 04)1 7?* 

M 145? 04U *•* 

M 145* 1611 VS )$2* 

M 1457 2JIU7 DK VMM 


M I4M 
M 1436 
M 14*0 
M MM 
M 1462 
M 1461 
M 1464 
M 1465 
M |4JM 


M 1400 
M 1470 
M 1471 
M 1473 
V 1471 
M 1474 
M 1475 
M 1476 
M >477 


(IN* ff* 

0172 DK 4HM 
<037 MR 43)7 


M 1461 075* 777 

M14V1 msi rr 

M 1493 0)44 OK t«S4 

MIM 1396 V5 2I06 
M 1495 0)54 rr 

M 1466 0)4) rr 
M l467 OVKI DK i 5)6 
M 1*98 2*31) DK 7906 


M 1300 03*3 777 

M >301 03*5 DK 5571 

M 1302 05M DK 3452 

m iso) am L4w 

M >304 052* 777 

M-1305 032* m 

Ml30* 0824 777 

M 1507 0320 DK UB>) 

M ISO* 139* VS 198* 
M-1308 0)27 777 

M 1510 03)0 DK 4251 

m i5» om rr 
MI512 0325 777 

M I513 1602 MR 2011 ' 

M 1514 1603 VS 792 

M-131S OVA OK . 6*4 
M 1516 0367 777 

M 1)17 2»l) DK7S11 

M 1311 1599 777 

M1319 0501 7r 


IL Vi: » 6 7 71 
PUN 
JL 1071 

JL *52- • I* 674 
P 195 


<M 17 m 

(Ml* VS 3524 
IM22 DK 4114 
(Miw rr 
ow rr 

2*22 DK tin* 

i»4o3 r? 

2*24 DK4J94 
im*i m 


N VO* 30 317 
NMP 
MD 44) 

MD 716 
MDM4J7. 

MM5» 

MD, MM 340 p 197 
MD957 a 1129 

MD 951.39 43* IL 1113 
MD, MM 341 P 16* 

MDVS2 JL 1114 

MX) 934 P 76) 

MD 9)6. J#416 a 1125 
Ml) 933 JL 1144 

MD JO 429. P 194 

MM YU 

MDtt55.M4« P360.BU. 1121 
MD 9*0 JL 1119 

U P 1755 P 1305, AM lln AV *16 
MD961 P 791; Rail!) 

MD96*.VK» JL 1056 
MD967 P790. & Jt. IIB* 

MD9tt3 JL 10*0 

MDV5« aim 

MO 939.1*44* a 1157 


MD9J| a KM* 

MD9D.W44* a 1045 

LM7SI PI296 

MD983 n 1077 

MD997 a 10*3, B P 7*3 

MOW a 1091 

MD911 PT7S 

NMP 50 472 P 63; A fan, R bia JL 39 

NMP 30454A P M. A hi 8 Nn a 55 

MD M 404. P 1*6. A hLl bu II 464 


m 147* on> rr 

M 1479 0376 777 

M 14*0 0)77 V9 

m 14*1 am rr 

M 14*2 mil DK i 167 
M 14*3 0)15 DK 11127 

M 14*4 0)1) VS UN 

M-J4W 0)12 OK ) *3* 
M 148* 1401 VS 202* 

M-i4*7 idio rr 
M 148* 0V* DK 3*63 


MM 352 
MD923 
MD 940 
MD 986. 39 Oil 
MU 6*4 
NMP 50 461 
U MIM 
MDVT8 
MD 9*2, M 44) 
MO. MM 344 


MD 341, J4 44/ 
MD 989 
MO 667 • 

MD MM 577 
MD 921 
SMP 30466 
MO 91* 

MO 979 
MDI010 
MU 92*. W 461 
MD 50 445. 
M.M542 
MDIT* 
MD977 
M09t* 

MD 922.194/4 
NMP JO 477 

mi m 

MDW4M. 

MM 351 
MOJO 431. 

MM 541 
UP 17.34 
L P I 130 
MD 920 
MD 9)9 
MD93I 
MOW 47V 
MM 350 
MD. MM Mtt 

MM 
L M7SJ 
UP 175* 

NMP 50423 
MDV80 
MD 6*4 


P 77* 

aim 

P 7*3. A tav B tat JL 1090 
P 7*7. A tat B ta. II 10*5 

as? 

P 1297 

a io*i 

A Si 12511. B *1 ttSUs 

A bit . P 114. B tat a 44.1 
P T7J; A V*. I Hu a 10*2 
P 192 

r 7*0. A hi B b» JL 1081 
a 1092 

a 469 B P 198 

P 77*. A. Si 12.511. K Stt 1UU 

as*. B 1**2 
P 774; B: a 1127 
a 1097 

a mo 

P 780 

a 471, A V 20 186. 

B S» 2D III 
P 7*6 
a 1053 

JL 1054; A Si 1*6)7 
B 5. 11 61* 

P 777 

as* 
a iwi 

a 474; b p 111 
P 1*8. B a 473 
P IK® 

P 1299, A tat B hi* AV 313 
P 7|) 
a 1124 
a 1027 

P 179 


a 1120 

P 1301 

P 1102; B AV 514 

a 80 

P 7*2 

P711. Ata. Itn fl. |||4 


MDSF 


M 1520 2*10 DK 45)2 

m i 52 1 0*13 rr 

Ml323 0*47 

M 1521 0412 

M 1524 0*10 VS 34)3 

M-1S2S (Mil rr 
M 1526 CH09 7T 
MM537 0108 rr 
MIC* 0192 OK-1417 
Ml329 2123 DK 4157 

M-iMo o)»j rr 
m 13)1 0190 rr 
m 15)2 0)9) rr 
M-ISM 04*4 rr 
UIBI 159) VS 9*1 

MI5)3 0162 rr 

Mill* 0)61 SD3554 


M-1537 (1360 

M 153* 0363 
M 1539 0792 
M 134(1 03*4 

M l Ml 0*72 
M 1542 0477 

M154) (M76 

M 1344 0471 

M 1343 0401 

M 1546 0440 

M 15*7 0444 

M 134* 04)3 

M 1519 0*16 
MI5» 04M 
M 13)1 0440 

M1532 0442 

M 111) 01)3 
M-I3S4 0466 
M 1333 0*53 
M 1356 0*36 

M 1537 IMS* 
M 1551 0*57 

M 1559 0451 
M1V0 0*52 
M 13*1 0431 

M 1362 043* 

Ml VO 089) 
M 1364 0*61 

M 1363 0462 
MIS** 079) 
M 1367 0941 

M 1349 0*47 

MI5M 0143 
M1570 (1*43 

MI57I 0640 
MI J72 (M81 
Ml 57) o**4 

V 1574 0*1) 

MISTS 0U9 
M 157* 0948 

MIST? 2B89 
M 1571 2*71 

M 1579 2916 


MD. MM .34* 
LMIRJ 
KltP. Ur 02 
MD. MM 54? 
MO 9)4 
MO 929 
MD 9*1. JJ 97 
MD994 
UP ITS* 
MD99J 

MD975 
Ml) 024 
MDMM538 
MD 914. >8)62 
MD MV 346 
MO 919 
MD9)S 

r* MD 927.3*45) 

rr mow* 

VS-E 8* 610 EXB 
DK 1(1076 MD. MM 55). 

3*43) 

DK-E 2111 MD9C T 
DK 571* Ml) 065 

rr MU 049 

775 MD9b6 

rr md ioi i 

rr MD 1015 

rr md 00t 

rr MD937 


JL 466. A P IIS. B St 201*7 
P ISO) 

a ii» 

P 117 

a 1029 

a i uo 
a HDD 

a i«7 

PIN*. A Ml. B tat AV 371 
a IOM. A St 20 UK 
B. St 3D 111 

P 772: A tav B tas a 105? 
a 1051 
JL 463 

a 1122 
a Tin 

P 7*4 

A SI 12 311. A tat P 771. 

B. Si 12412. B Wt: II. 1021 
Jl. 1049 

a 1066 

a 172 

P 190 

a 102 * 
a io3o 
a iin 


rr md 939 ii 

m MD946 

rr un io>* 

rr md <ui 

SD 2031 MD97UMW 
rr MD 945 

rr. md 94j ii 

rr md«4* 

r» mdvki 

rr md tot i 

r' MD 1012 

r> MD. MM 555 

DK 1707 MD 974 

7T MD 996 

VSN 8)609 EXB 
rr md 992 

DK4412 NMP 30462 
DK KM4 MD 941 

rr md looi 


rr 


MO 990 

MD 1002 


rr 


m 


M IV_ 

M-IMI 29KI 

V 13*2 2912 
MIS*) 2940 

V 13*4 29|| 

**•15*3 2929 

M 13*6 29)7 

MISCT 2931 
MIS** 2917 
M ISM awl 
M 1980 2920 

MI 391 2802 

M 1592 0*06 

MIS8J 2814 
Ml 59* 2MM 
M 1395 (*62 

M 15% oa* 

Ml 587 ,twa 
M I59| 0863 

M 1589 0247 

Mid® 1)86 A 
M 1601 2*79 

M 1402 0666 

M 1603 2912 

M-KK14 290b 
MI6Q3 2** 

M 1(06 2918 

m ikt 292i rr 

Ml** 28)0 rr 
MI6W 2926 ™ 

MI6HI 79m ITK) 
M-16U 291) rr 


rr kup. Luo* 

"r KUP. LU O) 

UPVrtlX 16 EXR 7 
IIPMAID l*r EXB 

rr lp 


LP 7 

LP 

LP 

LP 


LP7 

rr lp? 

rr lp 

rr IP 7 

m lp? 

rr lp? 

rr lp? 

ITMIXOI 101 EXB 7 

o nn exb 


lp 


upv/vn-54) exb i 
nmviMoj) exb 

DK 4931 SMP 322421 
l IPM/VD 117« |-X{) 

I'PMMD 1139 EXB 
SDI976 NMP 52.2407 
IPMMD lir EXB 
IPVAO) 1124 exb 
liPMMD I4JB EXB 11*0 

rr lp? 

TT LP 

unvxv-s EXB 3 
rr lp? 


ailKfcB P7)* 
a 1096 

p 799 . b a mi 
P 7 M. B n IIM 
a mi 
a ii** 
a HU 

P 75 ? B a 11)9 
P 75 ) 
a 1142 
a iih 
a tin 
aim 
jl no* 
a lift) 

P 196 

JL 1047 
JL 10*3 

a 171 . R Aacta* 

IL 109 * 

P 6 *.B JL 61 

JL 112 * 

IL lilt 
a Km 
a kmu 
aim 
Jl no* 
a ti55 
a UN 

DAK. p 436 I 9 B 
JL .147 
AVI?* 

DAK. 6 A *7 SI 
AV 8*4 
AV M 3 

AV **6 

DAK p 567 NS 
DAK. p 569 M 
AVMO 

DAK. p 5691*7 
DAK. p 367 NII 
DAK. f WT*' 

DAK. p 341 O* 

DAK. p 457 200 
a 165 

AV *79 

DAK. p. 459 22 A 

a )56 

a 92 :AO»:PIO# 

a )S 5 

a 357 . A 1 DAK p 4 M 2 ID 
n 90 A (21 P 101 

a 333 
a .mi 
a 200 

DAK. p 569 P 6 
AV Ml 

DAK. p 457 2 QA 
DAK. p 568 02 
DAK- p 56 * 04 
DAK. p 369 P 4 
DAK. p 56 * 08 
DAU p 457 200 
DAK p 567 N 9 








DATA M-J6I2 to H^96 


441 


MI612 2914 

M tMi 2U3> 
M 1614 JN.H 
M mu j*i* 

W1616 W15 

M-lM? JW 
M I nLa 292,1 
M-1619 J»M! 
Miti20 M1,S 
M-3621 J*K7 
1* IAX2 i«l 
M 162) 2427 

VMtW »W 
M-im? iwj 

M IM6 2**0 
M16J7 I5LM 
M IB.3 tifliA 
NMM9 URN 
MIMI fltit 
Wifi)! 0894 
M ItU IWTT 
« ES33 (W12 
W CAM WH7 
M-L105 HI I 
M fiSfi 0124 
M-163-7 11*52 L 

m iau mw 
M isas flail 
M 1A40 W] 
M-HHt IXKHl 
U 3M2 t»Kr 
M >6*3 mts 


17? LP 

fff LFt 

17? LPT 

LF? 

7ft L? 

It? LFT 

77! if 7 

t 4 ? LF 

m lf? 

T.r lfi 

L'fKfflV-23 E>J ' 

777 LF I 

777 LF ! 

777 LF 

OMMS-lliV EXD 

m lp 4 

3«-£ 93-6JI EJiB 
MDHnU pm 
HS3 *3-60 EKB 

in-£ innn i -jch 

Mff-E KF-612 EX.N 
m tl-Mt BCD 
IIP E HI Ml LAJI 
IW4MUMH6E2H1 
MN-5 H * 1i2'l FJHi 
MU-\ BM26 SUi 
101-3 tl 624 LAW 
W-S BMCTB EWEP ' 
IMC 42 IMIllO.ll 
(■J-.mi) EXB 

cm MftMTfOn 

3 9.3-WM O0 ■ 


W-lfiU OH 1.3 M0 4V*4t FJtB 
«1M1 ut3w MM *1423 Oil 
wren* QKH Dfc-A IM2T OH 
M lt4T 11*26 Ml»«l LW Oil 
M IM* liHHfl hi;-H(^3 *TP 
M I MO ;kb; ITU-MLI l<2. F.KIl tjj; 
*1 1650 2M1 1UWAUMI7 EXH 


M IASI 
M 1652 
M-ifiiil 
W F654 
W-ttJS 
Ml 6)6 
M |fi« 
M 1693 


OK *164 fi Mr H !4J4 
mu*' liHWFMH etmjiii 


ISIS LJT5 
3901 Hh v-h. 
0*79 !IH 54aJ 
23(112 UK W2VI 
WI67 DK mi 

ms m m * 


«mf 

Vmi j m j?j 
71 Ml* WUWJ 
'utr sn.jiS 
NMf 5! I«5 
MU 73*U JflJ-Sfl? 


m-i«w imi imuasi! KXh 


AV ITT; A UK. p Wf 07 
tM K, p 36»FI 
DAK. F SMtPi 
UU.7 M*Ot 
AV971 

E4K.1 368 OH 
DAK. jl 569: 06 
AVB2 

DAK. p Wl.fJSi 
DAK. p. 5WJJ 
U*fc. p 45T JKC 

I J -*6S, p! [urerC 

DAK. p »7 S* 

AV »1: A- DAK. p. SCTi.V? 
lUh 

DAK. p. 57ft.QI 

II, IM; A|7lMv KicBen 
IL rw 
IL 3S 
IL 155 

IL 151; A (It AKhm 
It. lift; A OI Ash* 

IL E74; A (3T AkBch 

ri. J Vh A 1 .1 1 Ul A i ll hu Am 


fl. 1ST 
IL 173 

n, iti 

vsi p JiJ.atM 

jl m 

k vsi f . jut aw rr? 

A UN VSI. p 271, C TS 
3LS4. IS LA J 1'74. t Sr. 51:2 
IL 19* 

IL t4t 
a si 

V3L r »Sr t h T| 

IL1I 
H 147 

JL Hi. A: Si. (4 N.T, 
ll St. 14 FI 

Jl ISM «* JArtifcLp 4161 


itj6A 3011 H0I 

II TAT WT III7A 

H Tap vise riY (i4 

ii m *►* mw 

Him W!1 1411 

M 2+i yy+j ss» 

M-J72 .56(9 | PA5J 

M 27.1 53 76 2K2U 

H-I7t Kill Mr? AIM 

H-mrik 3W? 31)1 

Hi 

H 'hA «57 lil+l* 

IE1P3HI VEl (iniTl 

111 AIM 

H-.UU 114) 4i 119 

il im mts jsrfif 

lll» WT5 PtI-21 

II-.3X7 mi p Ui-54 

II Vtt 41TT (3563 

ihw ilfll 13X55 

PI-390 MI24 H 3HJ 

HJft) 44-T4 13651 

H-.WJ Ulff 1726 

HW.I \un 111(21 

H-J9* 194H A* JO 

H S3 II7J (1142 

If Ml «C7 An l(C 

If 474* ™ 

II *m* |MJ7 

E3 5N 31VU 76*J 

H-KW Jtm 3144 

II401 516* 7MH 

H-WQ H« HA}] 

>1 -AM 22Jlf At I li. 

H-4TM mi |*4i 

H-KO 444) 11776 

Hltlfc 3»3 5476 

H*ff U3A I4IL 

li 40* 3(173 || 3J» 

H-409 J[ftJ 225V 

U 4IU 3040 IftTN 

Mill Sffx 717 


KM*I PWP 

I PM Ml AV 191. j. P b7 3 

iwrr AV *51: t T W7 

IIME«1 AV 7*7; *rF9Sft 

UW 372^1 P *3. H, P-Jl.. 17 

I IMS AV3A|sk»1A3 

I IM *9 AV 3111: *' TV 53: W53 

(IM 1* AV ft* *1*411 

llw AV 165 

UMiir AV2* 

riM IH AV jftj; A Pn. 57*70 

PIM 151 AYUH;* Pltfl* 

HM 17* P PEWk A- Pj 79-IX I7fe 

ILM r« u LM P 937; 4. Pu ,IT:I>69 
nu Ifth AV 135 hi 53-50H 

UU 144. U 57(11 AVWlh« 

S-.PW AV«*;tP(JH 

HM J* At 141, * p 174 

I I'M m.mw AV 417, i. P DOS 
HM IVL5J2H; AV Alt t fW 
IIV1 4 A V 4 J4, *. ? 172 

KMt» AV BA. r 1* 1«17 

HVI 39 e Pb 43:4*72; 11J A AV 157 (2). 

ffilA: AV 111 01 
MM 41 F4I4 

PIM 152 AV 19ft. A: IV 51 3.W: 

e:JV 1Tjb« 

EfM 47 AV I«;e:FETJ 

um i* j* m 

1134 425 AV 5SJ >. L J. C.*-41. IV JA M« t 

HM 159 AVJ^.^ p*w, 

HMII t AV'242, i P9jfi 

HM Jt PWl 

HifW AVIH.fVW* 

HM 5'> P VO! 

MM 94 AV JMietpl tU’iFQ 

HM 93 AV 214 E-Pu 31:5011 

FIM 134 F 127 

HM'Mr A: P*h WkJ»4I,(M A. AV *21 

HM 75,i27PH AV S]; s PKH 

HM ai P StA: »' JV S3 ms 

11S! °* AV 1ST: j. P9IT 

KM3.CJ* rWD 

ILM 76; J224IT AV SH; e P X\ 1 


If 411 MD& 4tmj 

IMlJ 3032 234J 

II 414 1-1*4 iw 

PM 13 32KU IflSfl 

H-4L6 HOS JJJW 

H4I7 3051 J644 

H4JB 1173 13323 

H4!fc 4+01 tail* 

M420 36 H 53W 

«42l 11326 1921 

H 4JJ 3115 g » 

H -423 3056 All 

IMil 7 SUP 2120 

H423 Wd 2*35 + 

H4I* 3133 2796 

II «T 13 [7 3367 

M-AT1 J7Z! 13433 

H 429 mi 1 4*1 

M-430 3304 H6441 

EI-4JI 44T3 13690 

3-M32 3636 A 44:1 

3! 433 JIS 3695 

H-*3l 1201 I23U 

11-435 4(VpT ■’7354 T 

IMiPr 32 Ef 143 

11417 m 3 11163 

IMS 3063 123 

PI4W 4446 13151 

Fl-un Mis iiSMr 

+I-M.I 3074 SSIfl 

11442 3093 293ft 

KMS 3121 ||5» 

h 4-u 4123 nm> 

H 445 4*44 tz*54 

K-44A *734 4ft9| 

II 447 VPfi 3439 


HM 32 

IIM 31 
HM JV 
HM >JU 
HM 1?3 


H M L53 
IPA4 if# 
ILM 73 
HM m 
IIM US 
PIM 3* 


HM 1BT 
HM III 
HM J90 
■UMTS 
HM 93 
HM 171 
VHP SlJffW 
IfM 11 

HWM 17.777. 

AO 455 
HM II. 72WV 
HM JW 
PIM 1 V| 

JIM BE 
HM 24 


PlUi ASi: AVASfc 
«. IV. J« 4 PM 
AV Ut4i P*. R2W3 

PVEi 

AIHI AV4+3. 
4 ■ffi.JJ-'PJI; iHf P177 
*V04. I P*T1 
PHI 

AV JlJt 4 P 5G2 
PVSft. AUiAVUj; 
t: PM- SS 3253 
rta 

AV 111. ■- p Hum 
P 073; A bn: AV VPU 
FVB;A(^;AVia 
P93P2; AV2AI 
AV 241 ; i P9,?9 
PHI 

AV3lT,*-Pft6J 

Avan 

AV7S2 

AV 3*V *P*4P 
AV 308; e PVS3 
P *90 

rm;A F*, SH.U14 
AVJ47; *-P932 
P961 

a v ntic-JM. ii-jtm? 

r*Ex 

pan 

AV3UCI 

T mr, A, Br JL. 75 
P*|0 

J L i 1ST; * P 1233 

AV 555; A. e p#U 
I* 90* 

P OTI: A hi AV yi) 

AV 543; h: PS24 
P SSL A Fu JAJCMv 


11*4* 3054 1114 

II449 Httu 1055 

H*S0 3094 111 

11451 3I5T 271 

H 453 3134 3SJI 


1*4.13 3061 HPiS 

H-454 1132 12164 
H-451 3K55 E1179 

H4» HMl PM | 

EF457 4134 13*57 

H *W -HJ50 1JTI3 

PI4M 9772 \m 

H-iff) 4A8I -136*7 

H«l .9337 5253 

H-4W JfiSP jffMJ 

H4M 3M7 JT3J 

11 46i 7100 741 

H-4AJ 5IJI fi |IM 

H 4rtf. Jill |[J6| 

HAftT 362* MP3 

14*6* 30ST I1S3I 

JE 469 5139 13034 

H-fPO 31*6 icno 

IP 471 3145 1 If,TO. 

H*72 JL52 ill 

11.473 MFH PIV*TO 

■1*74 51 a* LJA4 

II *73 3WJ H L34I 

h- 476 iiEpj i an 

H477 463ft H97 2ftJ 

IF4TI 3D9B 943 

H*» 3099 P If 21 

H*HP 7110 11039 

H*4| 4679 fc>Sff 

h. 4*2 vm im 

H-l*3 3964 m*l- 

H4U HS4 11361 

11493 315* ttUI 

tl-4|* >950 ns* 

H *97 T9?3 232V 

H*9B Jim J4p 

Pl*t9 Up jtws 

H*VLP 4674 Ij)g9 

!L«J V** irai 

H-W2 1042 +233 

13 49) J430 3I1J 

H-m 3211 12332 

114*5 5191 11342 

H *W 4T1V ) 620 


HM 22 
JIM LttlQH 
IIU 22 
aWp 77*15. 
AJG 4fll 
ns* i, ujja* 


HM 19 «5W 
LP-90T 


HM 3fi S4J191 
HM 13. .+2JP9W 

3 EM ikO 


E1M532 

HM7.M5TO' 

EIM48 


HM 


HM Vt 
HM 15 
FIM 43 
WMT52J2WH 
HM )1 


HM A 
EtH 

ILM I Ji 7*S2 
HM TI, JJ4*ff 

EIM I7A 
HM 163 
HH IX? 
hm m 
HM 112 
HM m 
3 IM 106 
HM *T? 

1334 5> 

MM IT 
I3M L{* 

HM 71 
HMW 

I IM 11 Li 

HM 1P2 

HM I I 

HM 33* 


PWLe Pu 30-3006 
AV 32L ■ P «W 

HU 

a LlS9i * PJ253 

PBI7; AN 16:391 L: 
A ier A V MH 

rm 

pci 

P tJU, 1 hr. SliJWP. 
Abu AV 151 
P023 

A V 544. e p 914 
AV *3* t PS25 
PtPJ 
P975 

a TlA ». p « 

AV 19ft. t PiL 5V.M&4-: 

4 Me P SPftT 

AV930 

AV Hi. i pfljff 
V B74 a F'u 4 L-4.192 
rfflUte. AV217. 
r Fil 5ft HUb 
AViUfit * P9H3 
av 531 Eparm 
P 114 

P159J; A hit av m 

AV 2P4, i PW 

P?« 

AV 425: e PSKft 
JLTLj Ml 
PICSOvA- P H IA 1992 
Hite P 3-1II 
AV SU.ftPlLlfi 
AV S3*; e PNI6 
AV 307, t pft79 
AV29Cti:pW 
AV 56J. II PU. 51 JCMtl 
AV 3M:i:?«»2 
PkMfc A tlji AV 249 
AV 11 Qt I Vm. 45:4X73 
AV 756: ■: Pu. 31.1013 
AV 59J 

AV iW; e- Ptl 444M6 
p«i, A tri, H: AV il l 
PUM&AtHi AV 2ft* 
AV2 I*;e Pm» 

AV MM; » p 9JB 
AV 267 

AV 321; t! Pu. 31:3040 

PM2 

AV (32 














442 


DATA HA97 to H-665 


n-m? jjfiff jw 

H-i$» 4f*2 [ 1785 

ii m 4i ld iron 

M-im mi OKI 

h-hi im ms$* 

H-MI JH3 5634 

H-MJ 3129 I null. 

H-9CW .1113 FI129 

TI-SOS 4119 HUB 

H-3GA 3007 TO 12 

FI-5IF7 3159 1131 

H-5W *>ft 12140 

IISJ9 310b IEG39 

H-JFO SlSF 2265 

H-511 Kilft E 11H 

H -in >i63 I [890 

H-513 3363 1 2D 

H-M4 ill* J4*3 

H-5IJ 3 HU 12D&6. 

JE5L& 3 Jfrf) 12315 

H-317 41» U.W4 

H5Eft 3(60 3ETI6 

If 519 TUT 2W 

J E-Ml? 31ST 1476 

H-S31 TUJ iiwu 

II 521 1157 33[79 

It. 523 44n 13732 

H-534 3150 to 132 

K 523 3U$ 2726 

Ifm 3(9* 3W6 

IliTT 472J 195AS 

H-J28 3315 12264 

II 529 39SJ 1743 

H SW 5144 11 TO* 

IT-331 3172 15149 

11532 1174 (Jnai 

H-5J1 }«5 B I?22 

B-3U 1»|J HM 

H 335 IWJ H 449 

H-53ft 4ffiM ?!? 

HI17 im HfrIJ 

H-J38 3<KT G 291 

11 i» 4101 At 3 

H5*! JLH B3M 

H-541 1214 11$49 

H 542 4759 7!? 

B54J 1177 IWJ 

H-544 3H4 2367 

>1-545 3622 1379 

H-M* 1*97 H S4P 

H-547 1669 12110 

H MS MlB 11761 

H-549 3940 12353 

h-ssg am I till 

11-551 3197 25X1 

H-S52 32M HBtt 

H-533 4*811 IJ663 

11-554 474ft 77? 

H-535 39EtV 

H-596 44W2 77? 

H-5J7 4747 77? 

H-S!W 52331 105(1 

IE-559 33991 JEJ7T 

TiM 12323 
11-561 4665 1136J 7 

HJ65 447ft 13671 

H 563 -WT8 (3645 

NM 4 w.w mu 

H-565 1K3 11500 

■i v* un it mm 

m-»? 4iai m 

H-56D 4673 133(15 

H-M 1261 UM 

H-S7W 3212 4(25 

MS71 JWi ||J(m 

11-572 3W5 11385 

M 373 44 »F 

H-574 3MVW5 4252 

H-575 4721 7?? 

PI-576 *714 ITT 

11-577 1243 1226 

H -,7h 4ft7? I MW 

11-579 4*49 I3M7 

H4B0 4672 QJTJ 

FI-551 11 i .W44 J 4K2 

ill 

TI-5S7 HSJ I 1J» 

II 583 4671 13017 

H-SIW HJ5 541S 

>1 585 AM* MH* 12111 

(Mtt 3237 12111 


HM 1« 
FIM 175 
1LM 197 
HM 103 



I 1 M m 
HM 52 


tlM KJN.-UJMI.' 
HM ft. 52 5BW 
tlM 44 
FIM63 
FIM 111 
HM M 

I EM &7,JLinW 

FIM 14 

P*VIF SlJOftl 
IfM II 


6*313; A-P-911 
P9TT.A Ik AY 
AV 555. p PftJft 

pwii ah*. a* y*. 

l Pu. 41.4593 
PvJ? 

P 91 

PMfl, ft: AVISO 
AY 427; i: P #*5 
AY 43 m. i p(tM 
AV549. a, Pftll 
AV4 !|;a FftOfc 
r 928; e Ph 4J:4ft]6 
PMJ 

P«5.A1k AV 221 
AV 554; p ill] 

*Y 433; A. FftIT 

IL 69, i P 90 

AV SJt A Pm tt-m. » PAW 


FEU m P90I 

IIM 45 AVIS, i KiU 

FfM IW..T2.HHI' P 05, A H* AV 353 

KM 11 AVftXfci MH 

KM IT A v HH; a P WO 

KMftT P914 

IfM 111 AV 245, l:FKI 

IIM IT| AYXB..iPW4 

HM 161 r«,4M AV 2»5 

IIM mi F9i1; A- AVSSAjePIi 5l:XMli 

HM ft? AV JJft, a 

IIM 110 F 941 

11M t«* AV m 


ItM 416 AV 4K6; *: Fu. 45:4*71 

KM 19.1 AVMft 

113,1 ftfi AV 219; k. Pu. 51:34141; 

*bi*. P9<N 

HM92 AV 2J3t *. P MtJ' 

KM U P-AKA 

HM ZDti AV 324; A: IV 33:529, 

a- IV 17:66A. * Iul p-PM 
HM 10$ AV 3AI, A. IV 3&J*1K,a>A 

Pu. rr o*; v p*. ji kito 

HMffM AV754 

MSI 521 AV £32: a F 1231 

KM 35 AV 1*4; A: PUTS 

1134 W AV3LB 

KM rfil AV 399. i. F 984 

IIM 101 AV 255, i IV 4I-4|«2 

HM 164 AVlM:ftPV3* 

ELM VR AVT79 

IIM V P IAS 

FIM. 55 P 843 

EIM 154 P 972 

HM m AV 300. * p 976 

FIM1H4 AV 313. t P964 

HM *13 AVJM.*, IV 43*472 

FIM Jft6 AV563 

HM JJ7 P UBS 

HM 119 P 944; A In: AV 266 

KM 1HJ AV JiAftlV IJJOSfc 

HM *76 \vm 

HM 428 AV IU (» 

HM 54HV AV 786 

HM 451 AV JM 

FIM 428 AV $S3 p| 

HM »2 P 995 

FIM 317 AV 137. *: P (HSi 

KM *14 AV 76* 

IfM 118 AV 148: *. P 945 

HM 407 AV !>} 

HM 121 AV3*FcF96W 

HMAJfl AV Ml 

HIM 100 AV231;AF9|2 

HMStti F967 

HM 33* AV(Ft (]| 

IIM 549 AV V27. it ¥ 1245 

HM 20J P 9MI 

ETM 4TO AY 357. *_ ¥m. 51JDH 

HM 526 AV S64 

IIM 230 P 966. A AV 331. i Fu 11:90*0 

HM 416 AVIftfr 

HM 231 P 1032, D-f>F- AV 598 

HMS.59 AVIL7|4| 

HM 545 AV 171(11 

HM TOO, 12.hTJi> P 1247 
HM 54ft P 1533; A in* AVfl4<]J 

FIM 16ft AV398. j:P«I1 

HM JjfcHJWi f AV 795; «: P l7*t, 

HM *92 A VITA 

MM |0| AV 24ft, [3J * F 4J | 

HM 512 AV TWl i: JV 4J.4I73 

EIM 517 AV 79*. tP ri*l> 

IIM 1I1.UWI AV Nt, *' P I24J 
HM AV Mi 

KM WH P |344 


H-5J7 3»1 l t»« HM *1J 

H-5SI 3957 21 IT FIM <38 

H-fW 3139 3611 HMJEV 

H,5W 3225 (£2* FIM 6IE 

H-Sl 5221 I6»2 U PVJ9 

H-592 **75 13917 HM 511 

>1593 3250 12131 KM tft 

H-5W 32*7 2*53 KM 513 

H-995 3623 5653 HM 514 


H-596 33t3 5975 

II-59T J17J SJ40 

FL-94* 41*4 13731 


h>i in 
VMP HIM 
KM 390 


H-5H 4472 137S8 IIM 161 

H-e03 ym 11334 HHH 

H c01 3044 10625 IfM 19 

H.fflJ 3(69 Till IIM I** 

H-HQtl| DM lilQW HM L4* 

1 .':, HM 146 

HHX 4711 HM-I3I HM 

H-Hft 393* 2533 IIM 501 

H-tttJ 3167 lUHTfi HUM 

N# (731 7401 HM553 

H TO* JUS 2394 HVt 1*7 


H-C09 VSTO JSftl IIM 65 

II AID 11768 INnl.HIM 

U-ill J2TO rui IIM 211 

H-412 3123 2TI5 J46f« 

H-ftlJ I2W 11040 HM 396 


H 61* 
H-615 
H-6E9 
Hft|7 

K (ill 
H-GI9 
IL6TO 
H-All 
H-fill 
H-*» 
11-424 
11-625 
KAJt 
H-607 
H.S3ft 
H-629 
H 630 

H-63E 
H-632 
II 633 
H-634 

11 m 

H-636 
FI-637 
FI-638 

H-0J9 


H+« 
FE'64! 
K MI 

llH; 


(731 XI03* 

.wtt Kimn 

Kt6-t6 
38*1 13065 


3*40 12133 

4107 cmi 
3850 4763 

3139 IlMH 
46«J 13*07 ? 

4TOE IWW 
*ft &2 W 
4146 13761, 

4197 new 
1392 I 
3844 M 
4 It* 12960 
3390 t3X.lt 

41W 13791 
M36 56?5 

4207 12931 

339* Ab 44 

3191 11454 

3J83 3 5*1 

4124 | JLH 

On 721 

*136 1JJS7 

(105 MB-KT7 
3Wt H 160 
Jie* p dm 

1P3 M7 


HM233 

116121ft 
HM 

fcWM, BM 
77151, A .(3 *$l 
FIM1ZI 
L, P-9IJ 
U P-9I2H 
FIM 131 
FIM 128, 

hh m 

FIM ni*j 
PIM ■ 31,11 JfllJ 
HM llV. F2JDJ2 
FIM 124 
HM m 
KM ■» 

FfM I3JI1, 

32JEW 4 

VMF 52JH15 
HM 132 
IfM 110 
HM ITT 
VMP 52.3£Uft 
IfM 407 
FiMP SLIGHT 
IfM 13377, 
T 23F0S 
HM I >315.. 
KJd37 
HM 

MD.MMvh 
F(M S >384 
? 2 J Q2 / 

FIM [5*87. 


H-fti* !2» u]7| 

H M5 3255 7J46 

H 4444 129J1 

H4VI7 XSl Fm-31 
HM8 4M4 1M3] 

H-649 3281 10695 

KA3IF II 337 

H45E 3293 

>1432 4A*4 143M 

H-653 3X11 7717 

KfiM 4lft* ??? 

H-65J 3XJQ ]3(j^ 

«■*» 32*6 427* 

H-MT 3217 igfl 

hftH 329J *795 

•MM 4[45 Ufa 

H- 6 TO ([ft) itjtK 

•• WE 3779 Vf> 

H-G61 39M AJ4| 

Jl « 396ft Af 36 


57 JuLU 
>IM 114 
SMP S2.W2I 
HM III 
JE3( 524 
FfM 426 
U P-<K7A 
KM 213 
KM JlKJH_yjli 
HM 223 
IfM 

F8MF 52 3021 
HM2E5 
IIM I im 
19fp 77,107. 
AO 4*3 
FIM 431 

HM 201/51JB2* 
MMP52.JU2I 
UfKlin 
FIM 135 
JIM 425 


EI4>« W7B PlV.|9 TIM 45® 

H4i65 *IU >391J TIM 25ft, WJJj/ 


AV7*3;tftL44;4*l* 

AVya 

p U*1; a: Pn. 3 *. jrrt 

AY330ii;Pf3l 

P tlift M h) 36:3*77; 

A to: AV 456ii. IV. TO HIT 
AV 7V7; k F 1250 
AV 426; m. Pu. 45:4*73 
AV 793, A: P«. 56 5811. 

A bii E'u 37671; *■ f 1344 
r 1243; Ata, AV7W; 

I Pu. J7 41S9;, 1 (be Pu M m* 
P lCC5,i Fu 39.41SS; Cl: AVS30 
P*I;CIL7* 

Pill ft bu AV 53A 
k Pu. ftl 4073 

AV 501; t. P mn- * Pu 61:407J 
AV KB- t P 1W 
P BB; fi AV4IS 
F 999: A Mi, i AV 296 
AV IVAEFlft PCfcS, 

P *61 

avi» 

AV 711 

F $10, A hi. K AV 33* 
p L1S9; B*Dr AV IJ3 
F PAH. A: FA 3ft 588ft, 

A tin. 0; AV 2*8 
POTS; A, B: AV 2J1 
P90*,A:AV IJ3 
AV I2L ■- Pu. VFX8J7 
A AY 333; 

».c,l;Jto SI.JOW 
AV 110 A; P I IT?, 

4. r P* W .HW7 

AV5W 
AV 56* 

Avim 

IL till 


AV 2164,1:P 950 
P13TO. a AV43G 
P i.iost . p HU 

AY 44].* P440 

AV JTO; *• PKH 
AVIS* 

PIT* 

P*(F. AiAVft* 

AV KiLx PM? 

AV 442, A P 442 
AV 265.1. P>^» 

AV 45F.UPOR 
p Ml; A: AV 340 

p to a n. i» 

A Y 354; ftp OS! 

PV5I 

AV J0i;ftP(B1 
31,64. ■ PDA 
AV 757; 1 : Pu, 45.-1870 
JL«7:i PV2 
PS47 

P H(ft, A, AV JTJ 
AV 83ft 

P 517, C k Ji. 413 
AV (IV, ■ PS63 

I' 863. A Pft ITlTTO. 

1 : tv. Njaa 
P 993; A: AV >35 

P*4;C J|*W 
P»l 

AV S93; I. P EflJO 
AV TTfcttPlUD 
P 13 Eft 

P 992; C. E- AV ISO 
AV *43; A P 844 

v mu; k- av m 

AV 3Il;x. F 1005 
P 77. A h 37.680; 4 A* JT:W» 
AV 534; 1 Pft 19:415* 

AV **3;*, B: P 860 
IL 1190.1 H ILM 

av m. ■ r nit 

r 864 

Mill-MS 

AV 506. ( P 1T7ft 
AV«F|. ■ P LD26 
AV T7J; A Pft 32,300 
(: hi 37:667 

AV J4J. A: Pa 32.J» i:pn*T 
PIUS 





DATA H-666 to H-837 


443 



MM 54*1 

hm an,siin 
TIM JlV.JGJOTI 
TIM IT? 

j<mp asm 


H4« mi I2G4 


l|4»l 

n-ry?2 

H4M 


4*33 
UWJ 
41 TO T - 
4171 


WTT J 41* 


IL HJJ 
H-7W 
U-7t» 


H-H M 
H7» 
H-730 
H-TH 
IV 7U 
M-Tli 
11714 
IITlS 
1171* 
H-TFT 

TI-71B 

K-TIV 

H?» 
H-72J 
H732 
H 711 
H-TM 

TI-T23 
>1 ?J* 
HUT 
HTU 
H-729 

Hm 

H73M 

H-732 

11-731 

H-7M 

11-731 

FI-TJfi 

H-717 

FI-735 

H-TJ9 

HTJft 

H-741 

■1-7*1 


360] 317* 

im 4763 
*14 131W 

3331 2430 

J3» «WI 

JI» 7Mt 
41 W IJoJl * 
JI12 ?WJ 


«a»} IM49 
N?5 4|(1 


3133 M24* 

34141 I 121 


»M 1 531 
*»7 tJTJB * 
*J$* 111291 

37W 4NAJ 
Jtw wan 

»34 2HJ5 
4511 7TT 
4t*7 |ij» 
3799 tOWl 
ITS 4CTI 


IIM IJJWF 

FIM IM 
HM :« 
FlMJiO 
TIM 2H3 
41M17» 

I C M 295 
IIM 172 
HM 

HM JSfJ 
HM u; 
Hit J*J 
HVM.M 

HM 137 
HU 344 

HU J7J 
HU 274 
HM m 


FIM 32* 
TIM MI 


IIM4TT 

FIM IM.EJWCF 
FIM 2*3.JJJt»2' 

TIM 243 


H-7U 4TID 77* 


H-744 
H 74J 
HI-7 44 
H74T 
H-744 
H-749 


wit jum 

*656 11516 

1654 mn 

*6«S uni 
*FS4 77T 


A 341 


rfpprn PTF 

ICMT7T 

HMJfle 


FIM 211, 13 JHTi 
TIM 365 
TIM 535 


JL3*«:P9j 
P ttUtt C. E: AV 591 
P 11553, C AV 599 
AY 449; t Pit 31JD12 

P HIM 

A V 2*3, A Pu 16:3811 

AV 121 

AVD| 

Avna 

AVI 69 
AVMj 
AV ill 
Avail 

PM* | AV *ST 
P M9; A: AV 421 
AV 60&. At ■ P JOJT 
3L IV: r PM 
P 1 Jl I, A bts. C AV?fJ 
P tIITiC. E-AV«T7 
AY 7*7 

hvm 

Avm 

AV HL i. I> P 42 

AY M2; A Pa JA1MT; 4 P lUTT. 

a, fc rv 11 u2 

Whrcfcr |t*A, pi cuivC 

AV 434 

AVAtiO 

P mil. A Hi AV 62* 

P 84* 

P529 

AVIS 

p*5n 

AVB7V 

P tut H; AV nil 
AV 15J 

PJfltf. A. P« *3 4794. B. Pu 
AV+305; A i=. U ccr AV m 
AV m A ft, 3* 3*74, 

a hi Vi.urrs 

AV 741; B IV 39-4163 
AV7H 

P 131: H: Pu S:1UA 
0 Mi: Pb S& HI* 

AV6S5 
AV *23 
AV *}| 

AYJ7T 
AV )?l 

AV 434 

AVfM 

AV *40 

AV423 

*V*9| 

AV71T; D: EELpi umJlJ 
AV TIM, A Pa 15..W5; 

IT Pu. 17*13 
AV All 

P 10 Ft H: P. 33 J56i 
B lx. AV*12 
P FtSttE. AV73S 
A V 37ft 

AVA5fcI:P 1010 
AV*T9i 

AV 453, A PJMA.S.pv n JAl* 

Bln ft T? 6*4 
AVW4 

AVUJ.8.7IK 
P IOTA 6 AV AU 
AV«5 
AV73J 
AV J7J 
AV 731 

P 1233, Ahu-Hhii-AV WT 
AV TOT 

P (III, 9 AV 701 
P ll*3 r A,D:Fu Jl +349 

Avm 

AV JJt 
AV 4111 
AV 7l I 

Pfl4+ 

P 1064. 0 Fu 44 4WA 

EH. pi Bomiak a\ a.- p he*; 

B: AV BUT 
AV [} 

AV777.1 P H49 

AV 74* 

AV U? 

AVTil 

AV U4: 0 P LMJ 

AVTO.S'P U61 
AV HU, B: P 12216 


H-731 

11752 
Ft-751 
II 754 


H-79* 

1I1BQ 

H-7BT 

IMAl 

H-163 

H-7*4 

11-7*5 

H-76* 

H-767 

H7« 


1129 1*77 
411* 11343 
5527 1151 


13735 

117* 

5734 

I4U3Z 


1351 

3351 

MAT 


H-7T1 W+l 2*11* 


H2« 

H-7W 

TIJ«F 

H-»] 

HKC 


H-IW* 
H H1T7 


4VJ* 

*077 

1364 


H-flt 
HUl 
HI 14 

II165 
FI-51 & 
IIJI7 
HUB 
H-AlP 
HUT 

HU] 

H-IIJ 
FI K3 
H-124 

U-l» 
TE126 
H-427 
FI-ill 
H-HZ9 
H-l» 


71 152 
11-135 
TI-134 
H-BJ3 


1565 
2073 
i 4M 

1403 


3602 60414* 

33W 6215 

117* 1 449 

42W L295J1 

HU 2701 


11151 
110*5 
nm 1196 
!J3*4 
1113* 

7 41 


4MT 

440J 

4455 

4HC 

4L7t 

4TJ* 

42 in 

301E 


H77 

Jxm 

13*5 


65457 

12*52 

1245 

TKI 

1251* 


HM2J4 AV*30 

TE54 124,12.™; AV+T1 
P 94 

PT7-IIA 
A.O. 492 


jl h«f 


U36 12377 

3*72 A*4T> 

M4l HfT-I!4 


13*1 17*9 

3*70 At 19 
*309 15147 

3704 HDM 
3364 103*3 

3616 111*1 

+J23 13671 

4A4T KCi-FlHl 
36i3 551 


H771 
H-7J4 
H 775 
FI-T76 
H-777 
El-771 
1I-TT4 
H-TH 
H-TIt 
U W2 
H-Tfj 
117*4 
II 7*5 
H-7» 

II 7ET 
El-714 

H 7H? 3t5fti 12J49 

H-79H 3605 12416 

J1-291 W( 70MT 

H-1*J 3692 3413 

H-293 3Mf> t S3 

U 7V4 «i* 12933 

H-W 4420 J3COT 

H79A 4H2* 141 IT 

+491 61J35 T 

WF 10(71 
3601 6166J 

3*49 (22* 

*Wi HM1I9B 
3ff79 4*11 

471* ]*J54t 

*347 (4E6 


P ill? 

16-63; A-Pft 15.35*1 
AV (47: BP 1116 
P 1(121 
AVTB0 
AV71* 

P 157 
A V*37 

AVHE, B: P (TO* 

P 11*3. O AY 712 
AV *44 H p j m 

Av*tr 

P 153: & AV m 

P 10.54, A. TV JI:WW: B: AY 245 
AV *511; I. PinO 
AVTJT.-A. ft. 33:1265 
AY J+.aA J3 
A lut PW B:3QS1; A Un P 11*4 
AV J+n, A Pu ?3:5I6>. 

A Hi. Pil 53:3053: H. Pu. 3J Jfl3| 
FEU 244 P IMP, A AV KM 

HU 2« P L050; B bii AV ftilti 

HM AV 5*|. A D*lri 27-3 

HM 4 Hi. TUBS} P UlU A' PU 43 **!* 

HM AV 1*7 

IIMJS6 AV 73*; B; P IMS 

HM AY Ml 

AV 593; A: Pu. 33:5163 
AV 63*: 0 P III] 

rmt 

AV SIS; 0- P Fill 
AV 506. A. Pu. 4 L: 413(1 
AYtf*. A Pu 5.1 V(VF 
AY 175 
AV54) 

AV 714, A Ps » 

A WrP LE60 

av tm 

AV 61*, B P 1169 
AV 69*. B: P 1060 
AV 664 
AV ||5 
AV 113 
AY?» 

AV740 
*v m 

AV *7*. A. PIT, 41 *3t* B: P HJ75 
AV fiTf. Bl P 1073 
AV 393 

AV 541. B DiHf 
AV7J1 
AV799 
AV *00 
AV K>] 

AV 405 

AV 614. A PL04« 


HM >M 
FIM 259 
HM 300 
FIM 36* 
FIM I15S 
JIM 2£A 
ttU792 
UM 3*2 

Hum 

HV6 11] 
HM 25* 
UM 2*3 
HM 239 

hm m 


FEM 434 


FIM 257 
TIM 129 


HU 36* 

HM 340 
HM JJT 
H M !*3 
HU 335 


HM 44S 

H5J3GT7 
HM 521 
IIM *65 
HM 

HM -401 
FLU S2£l 
FIM 521 
FEM m 

IfM 2311 
HM W 11. 
J2J072 


III* J*T AV 5TU A Pu OJSJ1 

HU 251 AV571 

HU. 2*5 AV57J 

HM 247 p HH9; A Ssi, C A V *■ 1. 

B. Pu. 4*’49T& 

FLU. 249 AY *13 

HU Vi* AY 74* A PU !5:JW3 

HM 343 AV *92. A PU 31: W», 0 I 

mm av m 

HM W4 AVT44 

HM13V, H.WI AV2TQ 


HM 114 
HM 3H 

EIU4II 


AV *53 
AV74I 

AY 741; A TV »J|75. 

A. Pu .1* 357J. B lax. Pit J7-**1 

AY 67* 

AVfl 


HM 471 
HM5U 
HM 4*7 
IIM 355 
IIM 4)5 


AV H9 
AV 3B9 


H-937 3351 J JIJ 


P 107* 

AV 336 
AVTD+ 

AY 743 
FIM TH#,12jWf AV735F 
HM 230 AV5II 

HU 1U AV 371, A Pu 333033. 

9. IV 33:3052 

HU 1)3*1 P *45. A Pu, 3l:30|| 

HMIJ6,EJMI AVT7*;A:P933 
HM.1MT A V 74(i 

HM L42 AV ITT; B Hi, pl. mtfrM) 

HM l4aiJJ(U P VIA. A hti: AV JTJ 










444 


DATA H-838 to H98S 


II MW 
H-A39 
II H40 

H-«l 
H I4J 
H-ft) 
II Ui 
H44J 

nm 

H.R4T 
H+« 
11-ll» 
H-m 

li Mi 

H-RS3 


HUH 
H4J* 
H-555 
J 1-556 
H4JT 
H-SSB 

H-5N 
II MCI 
K WE 
IE1W2 
H»3 
HSM 
liiH 
H-H6 
H-<*7 
li-*6l 
H**i* 
H-shi 
H 871 


jm i tm 

3371 I 3M 
1310 120M 

3m J7UT 
vlil nm 

41« H3C7 
467 li I Ulb 
41*5 K3|M 
1641; 17730 

mn MM« 

3597 LOTMJ 
3645 1 239 

3W 1 619 

3*0" ioirr 
3596 I till 

4*95 13356' 

*64f IWlO 
4743 rw 
fl!3 1414* 
#123 IJM* 
DID 31306 

43Z3 DJI’ 
4115 (5 259 
4534 0156 

4543. 0256 

4336 f j 256 
45*4 O 25 6 
453? 0156 

4M9 0 256 

434(1 OZS6 
4641 O 256 
4143 0 756 

4633 a 256 
311* M39 


HM 534 AV HW. 4 Pit. 44 4M3 

tIH 591 AVTMJ 

HM IW 4V1M 

NMF 312 100 IL 64 

HM1H ffeMlflaAVllf 

HM 269 AV «35; B*C P (3» 

HM 430 AV ITU 

HLMJI3 AV40J.R.CPNU 

UM 402 AV 151 

MM MS AVJftfcfiM* 

HMJII AV73I: 0 Pu J1.JK0 

MM 169 P FIS* A. Pu 4J-457* 

HM 368 f 1 IS- A„ e PU 45 4176, 

P:AV TiH 

MM 44K1 AV 7531 A- 4. C; FV. 4F H392 

UM 454 AV rrj; A: ft. 5J X155; A hu. 

B,C:Pi 45 4fTb,Cbii P 1176 
11M m flUJ 

HH«f P 1331 A Hi AV 777 

I EM 531 AVR04 

MU m AVU6 

tiM r M54 

1 ru 4tI. H-»W AV 77(1 A Hi. 8. f P IIM 

A I \ 44:4662 
f+MP 51301,7 IL 115 

SMP II IL 16 

JEM1597 P157 

OP-9MA PI1»,B:AV#5* 

l_ P PM 9 im 


104 255 p 1041 

UM 358 AV 619 

owns 7 AVivMia f*M» 

IIM2M AVUI 

UMlbi AVtJl 

HM256? AV 617 

I FM 159 7 P 646 

6W. BM *17. IL 1156 
A£L 495 


H«TJ 3*19 1336 

H-W3 3571 AI 365 

H174 7361 6495 

It-03 3651 A* 179 

H-876 2*75 1466 

11.177 1-W4 j*M 

Pt-f7l 3647 1792 

H-E79 3433 614 


HW 276 AYSJ9 

HM 377 PJftlfcB: A V m 

jimp si.vm IL 14 

HM 253 A V 615. A: P 1.044 

HM404 P 1125; A bU, IL A V 751 

I7M3JI AV TIM 

HM 498 A V 77* ; A. Pu 55 .1461. 

A kn; Pi, 37 641. 6: Pu. 53:MJK2 
HM i33.2I.Htfl P L2l2 


H-5ID 3433 WflOb 

H-*fll MU IM3 

H-Wl 3*36 I25» 

11-453 4713 T TT 

H t»4 3437 i a» 

If-<55 35X1 1235 

■I486 473) 1)335 

I14JT7 4OT6 I4H7 

14 HR 3466 10334, 

ll-B» 44*| I iVrt 

ll-IW 344* I A.HI 

M-Wt 3566 9GJ7 

ll-RW 3431 995 

M-Pfi) 31*1 t»il 

u-im inti ui" 

H-IW3 44*5 


UM *19 P IITO. A til AY 37R. 

H Pu. 41:4395 

HM 4(17 AVTSA IklKO 

B ft. 

HM493 AVJB fl P tP3 

HM546 AV 52401 

HM Jin P IH1 

HM 351 AVBMO? 

HMIT3 AV5Ml 

HM3J1 AV 70ft 

UM1H P mi 

HM Jtt r trn 

ITO77T E3L pL mr446 [1) A P I ELI 3, 

(11 b AY 644 ; 4, |k I'M 47 IM 74 

HM37T AV729 

HM531.MJW1 AV1HI 
HM 331 AV 129 |3j. A: Pu. 50J999, 

D: 5V.5LXU3 

HM W) P »m 

HM 491 AV 3*2 


H' 196 Mill? 1497 


P I lax A.- is. 11:04; 


H-WP 4aI5 1»» 

II. IW* tv* 1,17 

I I5W 3471 1224 


HMIJ M55 rmw 

II-Wl 14441 17737 

II Ml! 3335 1230 

H-1Q3 W45 2731 

II Mm 3417 JJ13 U 

If T03 3*49 I3PT7 

If Ml6■ 11 44A2 IHT7 

111 

11907 J1)T IJ067 

U.*Ul 14*4 KftVlt, 

fi Hen *467 mm 

H*IO MW KWH 

11-611 I4R6 "ASH- 

II612 156) iAVt 

31913 4036 J 33* 

H-6H *M3 6U4 

H-<IJ Ml 3 11WM 

H "16 W36 12316 

IM17 Mil 11716 


1IM *53 AV 345 

KM VH AV AH* A: IA*. 17 674 

FIM Ut P LfcTV. A Ini F hi., AV ?94: 

♦, V; FN 4)45)4 

KM 551 AV*29(3L A.B PU. 4KJ93 

JIM *79 Pill) 

11*4 419 AV 553 

in-MIT P IDS) 

HM 434, JJJ*M P IJH 

HM 293 AV642 

HM44U *V«l:A FV 3VUH 

HM 441 AY 356, 9 F^i 55:3235 

I1M4.H AV 162. B: P 1209 

NW 32J033 Ik 63 

HM452 AV 251 

HM 311 P lOW 

IIM 111 AV6Ml.B:P 1(772 

t,p-«u r im. A Pu H3W; 

a- FV II *393 

HM 541 AV 52a 

FIM *44 P OUA A- Pu 51:3037: 

G:Pu5l:M»fc Arc AV557 
HM *4H P 1316; A PH.pl WK& 515; 

Alar AV755 

HM 530 AV W6 A: PV 31 301* B P KT79 

HM nt.UMt P I WO. A hi. AV 670 


H-6.ll Mil LIS# 

H-919 *679 IX5CW ■’ 

H m 1517 1363* 

H-921 3314 11*53 

H»I2 nil I2*a> 

H-913 .W* 3171 

H-m 4*»A W 

ir-OlSill 2512 3256 


01 

K*» J51J 11441 

11927 150J I17J 

H92> 3537 1219 

IL929 3570 mi 

K 0)Q 3530 I 30 

H9H S311 *690 

H-V31 1403 6103 

IL9W 1516 OHl 

N- J m 4666 EI380 

IIP a 5504 (HU 

IW» *IH 1242 

H«7 »JS )S53 

h-915 mu tnu 

HW MSI 1402T 

11940 1453 .VX4 

H-941 lw 27131 

H'WJ 34«1 5152 

H-943 2401 *96* 

FI-944 54175 »» 

H94S 33BDI 3694 

HW6 l«l 2544 

B MF MW 5650b 

13+U MM A63» 

11949 idV J55U 

H-95P H6) JI3I 

11-651 \m WJ52 

iixsi 3J*j oar 

ItSSl 4673 13295 

11-954 ,(467 |TO2 

H-985 W 3611 

11-954 404H 11536 

H-WT Wn (3494 

H 951 4729 *77 

HX59 24OT II3J 

HVm 3M3 iff 

H96I 3*46 irfl 

H-90 354* 

H-963 3555 2iI4 

FIW4 43 FI )»»•' 

H-963 3562 )J?T 

*452 linn 

H-P67 1363 F2irn 

K-W AMB HU.im 

H-PW 5335 LF54* 

H-970 5S33 M 34* 

H-P7I 31557 4IU> 

H-TO 6*1* U7W 

H-972 3*n mi 

H# 2595 3341 


H-VJS M<n 223* 


11X1* 35B lllOJ 

11.977 ,iyti um 

IE-VM 3BW IIJ7 

H 979 4W> M)4 

H-™ 4709 pi* 

IF«I mt 13*7 


H-W2 3574 T&> 

»«*) )3t 359 7 


H-9H4 ill? r* 

H«l »77 Ma 


22*5 

1216 

157) 


IT39 

i mi 

1115* 


HM +60 
HH 422 
HMiil 
HM 799 
HMJ1* 
HM HR 
HM 3% 
T73 

HM 504 
HM4« 

HM3I4 
I1M 431 
HM 212 
HM Vi] 
HM300 
IIM4S 
HH 310 
FIM 419 
HM XU 
HM Af* 
HM 424 

HM 222 
1FM TJ> 
II.M KM 
I4M4V 


ILM 494 
IW 341 
HM 212 
HM 477 
HM 442 

hhm 

HM 461 


HM m 
HM 4J7 
HM513 
FIM VH 
FIM 546 
IIM 4» 
MM 295 
HM m 
HM 490 
HM 1 At# 


HM 127 

HM 445 
HM7W 
FIM 465 

KM XJ9 
KM 210 

KM 

WM 44* 

HM 351 
HM 442 

HM 143.UJWO 
HM Lil 

llM.417 


if-H 441 


HM 3TJ 
HM 421 
NMP 52J34T 
HM 475 
HM 4)3 
HM 545 


KM 374 
HM 37fl 


IIM 531 
HM 463 
HM H5 


PIJ96,* AV 644 
P im.BUl AV721 

av cam 

P 1101. B AV 64H 
r ICRKH AV 663 

r iw 

P 11134 

A: Pu 3*5173; {1) A: h. 5) 2090 
B TV. jfr:5fn,mi Pull-3049 
AV 7S4 

AV 374. A. hL 11:5014, 
AircPll7}.B N.55 W52 
AV 663. B: P 10H 
P 1161 
P IDS3 

rtw 

P I UJIF. A: Pu 3*3*71 
AV m. A, B: Pu 41-<W 
p i«n 
Pi 123 

P 1«I 

P 1 FMJi fJi B: ft. M-K7D 
£2>A:PJWi m B: AV 774; 

U-21 A; Pu. 29-259J 
P [07). A |ic AV 0j 
P E(I*PL A hi. B hi AV AAF6 
P 1096 

P UIPI, A PA. J7-6T3. 

ei IV »3im 

AV 701; B: P UU4 
AV 65* A- Pu 9 *«Ml 
0 Pu S:fi73. B fan.: P 109.1 

P kt71l a. Pb. fl#*i 

P 106* 

AV «1;B:P IMA 
P H*> 

AY34A 

AV 644; B P 1105 
AV KJ; A: Pn 3*3573, 

a ph, w sm 

P IBM. A Me AVfcU 
AV 5*5 

A V 662, B p leal 
P HOT 

av mat 

AV 3*4 
AV 74) 

AV 56) 

Ptl» 

AV 7ft A PV 35 3(10. 

B Pu. 33 lHTI 
AV 3(0; A PV Jl.StJ) 

B: Pu. 37-674 
P MBi H AV KM 
AV 156 
? 110* 

AV J54, A Pu 37650: 
ihwjm 
AV 655: B: P 11*91 
f ICQO ft IV JI 30J5 
AVJU2 

AV S5I: A: Pu. 5*3177; 

H: Pu KH9fl( 

AVlWrt) 

AV )9fl 

P 9*1 

F9M 

AV 3*2; A: Pu 3i2lJffT| B P9 
33:2165, & bu: Pu 37i73: B Iff 
Pil 33J0L55I B ifuurr P 1210 
P 1207, A h, 2J )*67; 

B Pu I3JB69; C. 35.3565. 
Bh k Crc AV 32S 
P IIS 

AVm; H, f.': Pu. 4 1 *m 
JL 62 

run.* p* *rmx & av m 

AV 359 

AV t3M5F.A Puller, 

A hi Pu )7;414; B Pu 15 31ft 
C Pv 31:673 
PI 151. A few: AV 724 
P I [53L A Pu 35- .1567, 

B: Hu S3 *56*. 0 Vt AV 77ft 
C: Pu. 3*»W 
A V 1(3 , A F 1221 
AV 39S; A: fV BeMT; 

B: Pu 37673: 0 trc P ] L9H 
Cl hi. UnJUift C b"- Pu 31*13 
AV 129 (4fc A- rt 35:3567 
B: hi THTOC h* *S;*5iW 
P 1133. A, B: EIL pL jirvinJll* 
CiAViW 

AV 654. A Pu 5M«ja 
0: Pn. 5) VHV. £31 A P 1093 


11-9*8 





DATA H-989 to Rhd-156 


445 


H-999 

4740 

773 

HM 410 

AV TOO 

Khd«2 

7901 

Rhd FF IV/21 (3! 

rsw 

a 1309 

14990 

4639 

109-1110 

HM 


AVISO 

Rhd-63 

7102 

m 

rsw 

a mo 

W-OOI 

4659 

HR9 10(0 

HM 1 


Lute 62 16 

Rhd-64 

7*03 

Rhd R 1V/J0 (Ml 

rsw 

a 1292 

H«1 

46*0 

innmi 

HM 


AV 951 

Rhd -65 

7IUI 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1269 

IF99J 

46 VI 

109 1102 

HM 


AV 949 

Rhd-** 

7105 

Rhd MW I2l 

rsw 

a nil 

11994 

4635 

1196 990 

IIM 


AV 156 

Rhd 67 

7W6 

RMF(V21<1) 

rsw 

a mis 

H-993 

4634 

HMtM 

hm ? 


A 0): tain 21176, 

Rhd-69 

7907 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a not 






A CH Mb 2104 

Rhd *9 

1*04 

Rhd* 

rsw 

a 1207 

H-B* 

465* 

H**-* 

HM’ 


MB 57-25 

RM-70 

79W 

Rhd. 

rsw 

aim 

H 997 

4651 

HM 7 

IIM’ 


MB 59-29 

Rhd 71 

7910 

7T7 

rsw 

a mi 

M-961 

47777 

HB9 1492 

IIM 


AV 659 

RhdTI 

7611 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1252 

II W 

4*37 

HR*-’ 

HM’ 


Mo 561) 

Rhd 7) 

7112 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1229 

ii mm 

4TU9 

HR* 1491 

HM 


AV 959 

Rhd 74 

790 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a mi 

ii inti 

4637 

HW 1101 

IIM 


AV 647. (I)A Mn 3WM0 

Rhd 75 

7914 

Rhd B IV/14 fT) 

rsw 

a 1*92 

mac 

M 

H96-* 

HM’ 


Mb 56 It 

Rhd-76 

7913 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1572 

H IC9I3 

•642 

H16-11I3 

HM 


AV *53 

Rhd 77 

7916 

777 

rsw 

a ms 

II mu 

•627 

1196-91 

HM 


AV 174 

Rhd 79 

7917 

Rhd B IV/3D III 

rsw 

a 139* 

H IC05 

•636 

119*97* 

HM 


AV 973. A Or Mo AH 6V 

Rhd 79 

7919 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1309 

H40M 

•641 

1196-11(2 

HM 


AV 952 

Rhd-HI 

7919 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 124? 

II 1007 

4706 

H99-1490 

HM 


AV 957 

Rhd 61 

7930 

mm c ui /21 <?) 

rsw 

a no* 

II 100* 

47(0 

1196 ‘Oh 

MM 


AV M* 

Rim-92 

7921 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a iim 

MlttlV 

4624 

1196-05 

HM 


MB A-17 

Rhd 9) 

7123 

Rhd FF tvm (1* 

rsw 

11.1374 

H 1010 

4623 

119*16 

HM 


AV 671 

Rhd 04 

7923 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1399 

11-1011 

4*29 

M97 236 

MM 


AV 665 A MB 109 

Rhd 95 

7924 

Rhd> 

rsw 

a 1305 

II 1012 

4111 

737 

HM.U6.341M 

f 1226. A AV 914 

R*M6 

7923 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1439 

W-ian 

♦413 

13516 

HM VI.SUM 

AV «27.F*A r 1021 

Rhd 97 

7926 

Rhd C 111/21 

rsw 

atm 

M IOU 

4613 

1191 «09 

HM 


AV 666. A <11 Mb 

Rhd-99 

7627 

Rhd MOT (2) 

rsw 

a 1295 

11-101J 

4*49 

1194 1 111 

IIM 


AV 945. A at MB r 1 

Rhd 99 

712* 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1214 

II ini* 

4611 

Mil 111 

IIM 


AV 964 

Rim-on 

7*29 

Rhd F 09 111 

rsw 

a 1440 

H-I0I7 

M6I 

II794 

HM 156 

AV 706 A B 1165.4 Ph *5*975 

Rhd «l 

7910 

77? 

rsw 

a 1257 

II IOIS 

419.7 

A 764 

NMl‘ 


JL 127. A ru 33157 

Rhd*: 

793! 

Rhd* 

rsw 

a i29i 

H-101* 

4734 

11293 

HM *42 

AV Ml 

Rhd 97 

7*13 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a tm 







Rhd-94 

7133 

Rhd B IV/3 15) 

rsw 

a U19 







Rhd 95 

7114 

Rhd E 11/17 C2I 

rsw 

a 1434 

fthd 1 

7740 

Rhd B IV/25 <6> 

31* 

JL 1471 |m* p 4*11 

BMW 

7155 

77* 

rsw 

aii9« 

*W1 

7742 

Rhd R IV (4 i|l> 

FSW 

a 1401 

Rhd 97 

7636 

m 

rsw 

a ii(7 

RWJ 

7743 

Rhd FF M3 (l| 

rsw 

JL 1.112 

Rhd 99 

7137 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1336 

RM4 

7744 

Rhd ■ IV/15 (2) 

rsw 

a I43J 

Rhd 99 

7*16 

777 

rsw 

a mi 

RM-) 

7745 

Rhd ■ IV/19 (9) 

31* 

a 1425 

Rhd 100 

7639 

Rhdc nuii iii 

rsw 

U. 1403 

RM6 

7746 

Rhd B IV/4 fit) 

MW 

a ijo* 

Rhd 101 

7640 

Rhd* 

rsw 

a 1377 

•M 7 

7747 

RM IP IV/I7 0I 

«* 

a 1296 

Rhd 102 

7641 

Rhd. 

rsw 

aim 

Rial 4 

7744 

rm n rv/ 2116 ) 

P5* 

a ui7 

Rhd Id 

7643 

777 

rsw 

a 1265 

mm x 

7741 

Rhd ft IV/22 (41 

15* 

It 1264 

RB IIM 

7643 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1514 

Rhd IU 

rum 

Rhd 


MW 

HUII 

Rhd 105 

7644 

Rhd FF IV/17 (I) 

rsw 

a ill* 

RM II 

7730 

Rhd E M/17 at 

MW 

a 1446 

Rhd tOh 

7643 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1437 

Rhd i: 

TTJI 

Rhd R IV ,74 (6j 

rsw 

a tin! 

Rhd 107 

7146 

Rhd FF IV/21 16) 

rsw 

a la) 

Rim it 

7732 

TfT 


MW 

JL 1259 

Rhd 106 

7147 

RhdFtvnai 

rsw 

a 145* 

Rial U 

7733 

W 


nw 

a U56 

Rhd IP) 

7646 

Rhd FF IV/17 (4) 

rsw 

a i2«9 

Rim-ii 

7734 

Rhd. 


rsw 

a ti 22 

Rhd 110 

7949 

turn. 

rsw 

a i»3 

Rhd 16 

7753 

RM. 


H* 

aim 

Rhd-111 

7130 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1330 

Rhd 17 

7736 

HM. 


rsw 

a 1397 

Rhd 112 

7131 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1229 

Rhd II 

7757 

RM CM/21 (1) 

rsw 

a 1390 

Rhd 111 

7932 

Rhd B IV/J012) 

rsw 

a 1309 

Rhd 19 

7759 

RM fT IV/25 |4| 

rsw 

a tm 

Rhd-114 

7953 

Rhd FF IV/32 <91 

rsw 

a 1430 

Rhd 20 

7759 

Rhd* 


rsw 

a 1329 

Rhd-111 

7954 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1537 

Rhd :i 

7T6CI 

Rim* 


rsw 

a mo 

Rhd 116 

7655 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1251 

Rhd 22 

7761 

RM FF IV/17 (5| 

MW 

a 1404 

Rhd 117 

7156 

Rhd. 

MW 

a 1369 

Rhd2J 

7762 

Rhd. 


MW 

a ill* 

Rhd lit 

7157 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1296 

Rhd-24 

7761 

Rhd. 


rsw 

a tor 

Rhd-119 

715# 

RhdBIV/20'l) 

rsw 

a 1409 

Rhd 23 

77M 

Rhd« 


rsw 

JL 1190 

Rhd 120 

7159 

Rhd R IV/14 14) 

MW 

a mo 

Rhd 2h 

7761 

Rhd. 


MW 

a 1376 

Rhd 121 

7990 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1201 

Rhd-77 

7786 

Rhd n iv /ami 

MW 

a 1)96 

Rhd 122 

7961 

Rhd F 0T13 (II 

rsw 

IL 1430 

RM 21 

7767 

RM. 


MW 

a 1206 

Rhd 123 

7662 

Rhd. 

MW 

a 1360 

RM-2V 

7TW 

777 


MW 

1L 1211II 

Rhd-12* 

7161 

Rhd. 

MW 

a 1203 

RM R> 

nim 

Rhd F 0«l I2i 

MW 

a U7I 

Rhd- 125 

7664 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1339 

RM 31 

7770 

RM. 


MW 

a mo 

Rhd 126 

766) 

Rhd R IV/14 151 

rsw 

a U3i 

RM 72 

7771 

RM ft IV/37 141 

MW 

a 1275 

Rhd-127 

7666 

m 

MW 

a iim 

RM 31 

7772 

RM* 


MW 

a iim 

Rhd til 

7167 

RM. 

rsw 

a 1359 

RM-34 

7773 

RM B IV/13 (2) 

MW 

II. 1412 

Rhd 129 

7169 

RM ■ rV/25 (3) 

rsw 

a lit) 

RM 35 

7774 

Rhd. 


MW 

a Dio 

Rhd 130 

7169 

RM* 

rsw 

a 1225 

RM W 

7775 

KM 1‘IV,71 141 

MW 

a i27i 

RRdllt 

7170 

RMBIVmOt 

rsw 

a mo 

Rhd 37 

7776 

RM. 


MW 

a 1531 

Rhd 132 

7671 

RM. 

rsw 

a 1320 

RM l« 

7777 

RM B IV/IV (2) 

MW 

JL 1407 

Rhd in 

7972 

RM. 

rsw 

a i)«i 

RM 39 

7779 

RM. 


MW 

a M99 

Rhd 134 

7*71 

RM. 

rsw 

a ii47 

RM4II 

7779 

Rhd. 


MW 

JL 1192 

Rhd-135 

7674 

RM. 

rsw 

a i4ii 

Rhd 41 

7790 

Rhd. 


MW 

a ail 

Rhd 136 

7*76 

RM* 

rsw 

a 1200 

Rhd-i: 

7791 

RM> 


MW 

a iim 

RhdllT 

7675 

Rhd. 

rsw 

n 1290 

RM 41 

7792 

RM* 


MW 

a 1215 

Rhd 111 

7*77 

RM. 

rsw 

a tm 

Rhd *4 

7791 

RM. 


MW 

II. 1363 

Rhd139 

7940 

RM. 

rsw 

a i im 

Rhd 45 

7764 

RM. 


MW 

a issi 

Rhd 140 

7679 

RM. 

rsw 

aim 

Rhd 46 

77*3 

RM. 


MW 

a D56 

Rhdl4i 

7979 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a in* 

RM47 

7766 

HMB IV/15 (51 

MW 

a 1266 

Rhd 142 

7691 

RM. 

rsw 

a mi 

Rhd 4* 

7717 

RM B IV724 |6> 

MW 

JL 1424 

Rhd 141 

7112 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a ill) 

Rhd 45* 

7749 

RM B IV/14 (V) 

MW 

a Mi* 

Rhd 144 

7193 

Rhd C 0V21 111 

rsw 

a 1299 

Rhd * 

7769 

RMFF IV/22(IV15J 3SW 

a i44i 

Rhd 145 

7964 

RM C IV/21121 

rsw 

a 1295 

Rhd 51 

7790 

RM. 


MW 

JL 1523 

Rhd 146 

7915 

777 

rsw 

a 1270 

Rhd 52 

7791 

RM. 


MW 

a 1230 

Rhd 147 

79*6 

RM. 

rsw 

a no* 

Rhd 51 

7792 

RM E 0/21 (2l 

MW 

a 1294 

Rhd 141 

7117 

RM. 

rsw 

a 1239 

RM 94 

7793 

RM. 


MW 

a us) 

Rhd 149 

7999 

RM. 

rsw 

a 1220 

Rhd 55 

7794 

RM. 


MW 

a ij4) 

Rhd 130 

7999 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1429 

Rhd5h 

7795 

Rhd. 


MW 

a 1235 

Rhd 151 

7990 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a dm 

RMS7 

7796 

RM. 


MW 

a 1303 

Rhd 152 

7191 

RM B 1V/2J III 

rsw 

a hoi 

RM-3R 

7797 

RM. 


MW 

a 123) 

Rhd 13) 

7992 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a 1379 

Rhd 59 

7796 

RM. 


MW 

a 1224 

Rhd 154 

769) 

KM. 

rsw 

a n*» 

RM4S0 

7799 

RM. 


MW 

a 1219 

Rhd 153 

7194 

Rhd. 

rsw 

a i5*2 

Rhd hi 

T6Q0 

RM. 


rsw 

a nos 

Rhd 136 

7195 

RM. 

rsw 

a ms 










446 


DATA Rhd-157 to Ai-8 


RM-I5T 7196 Rhd' PSW 

Rhdl5f 7*97 Khd EV/215) PSW 

RMI* 7*99 Rhd. PSW 

Bhd-IW T»W Mid' PSW 

RMI6I T900 RM. PSW 

RM I6J 7V04 Rhd* PSW 

RM-I6J 7901 KM* PSW 

«M1W 7*0 KM. psw 

RMI63 7903 Rhd. PSW 

Rhd 166 7909 Rhd PSW 

RM 1*7 794)6 RM B IV/24 ill PSW 

RM-1** 7907 Rhd. PSW 

RMHW 7906 RM* PSW 

RM 170 7W RM- PSW 

RM-171 7910 m PSW 

RM-I72 7911 RM' PSW 

RMI7J 791} Rhd' P5W 

■M174 TRIJ RM B IV/19 (5) PSW 

RM 179 T»U KM. PSW 

RM IT* 7919 RM' PSW 

KM-177 791* Rhd PSW 

RMI7» 7917 RhdF(V2l4l) PSW 

Rhd-179 7911 Rhd' PSW 

Rhd IM) 7919 RM* PSW 

RM 1*1 7930 RM' PSW 

M ill 791! TT7 PSW 

RM1IJ 7923 RM* PSW 

RM 1M 7923 RMCIVfllO) PSW 

Mill 7924 Rhd* PSW 

Rhd-IM 7929 RM PSW 

RM l«7 792* RM' PSW 

RMIO 7927 RM' PSW 

RM 189 792N RM' PSW 

RM 190 7910 RM' PSW 

RM-I9I 7991 Rhd' PSW 

Rhd 19J 7992 Rhd* PSW 

Rhd-193 7993 RM* PSW 

UM 194 >934 RM* PSW 

RM 199 7933 RM' PSW 

**196 7936 RM CIV/21 (4) PSW 

RM 197 7937 RM* PSW 

KM 19* 7931 RM* PSW 

RM 199 7939 Rhd* PSW 

Rhd 200 79do RMirvmm PSW 

RM-JOl 7*41 RM' fsw 

RM 202 7*42 Rhd* PSW 

RM203 7943 RMBIV/Mftl PSW 

RM 204 7*44 RMCIlr*r«i PSW 

RM20J 7943 RM* PSW 

KM 20b 7946 RM B IV/201 V6i P5W 

RM 207 7*47 RM* PSW 

RM-XN 7*44 Rhd* PSW 

RM 209 7949 BM' PSW 

RM 210 79» RM FWI3(2l PSW 

RM3I1 7991 RM* PSW 

Rhd-212 7992 Rhd* P5W 

RM2IJ 7953 Rhd* PSW 

*M214 79S4 RM BIV/1S fl) PSW 

RM-215 7939 RM' PSW 

BM3I* 7996 RM* PSW 

RM217 7917 RM* PSW 

RM-21* 7*9* RM* PSW 

Rhd 31V 7999 RM' psw 

RM 2» 79*2 RM' PSW 

RM23I 7941 RM* PSW 

RM 222 7964 Rhd* PSW 

RM 223 7*69 Rhd* PSW 

Rhd-224 794* RM C IV/21 (2l PSW 

RM 229 7967 RM FF IY/I7 (|3T) PSW 

RM-22* 796* Rhd E 0/17 <61 PSW 

RM 227 I*** Rhd* PSW 

Rhd 22* 7970 RM* PSW 

RMI2V 7*71 TTT psw 

RM230 7972 RM' PSW 

RM 2)1 7973 RM' PSW 

RM233 7974 77? pjw 

RM 233 7973 RM B 1V/XM4) PSW 

RM 234 7976 RM FF IV/22.1 I4/!3iPSW' 

Rhd 235 7977 BM IT IV/17 HA) PSW 

RM 236 797* RMB1V/4III PSW 

RM23T 7979 Rhd FF IV/IT 115, PSW 

RM 210 7910 Rhd* PSW 

RM239 79*1 Rhd psw 

KM340 7992 Rhd. PSW 

RM 241 79*3 RM' PSW 

Rhd 242 79*4 RM' PSW 

RM 243 T9M RM IT IV/22 (4) PSW 

RM 244 79*6 RMRIV/JOcV*. PSW 

RM 243 79*7 Rhd' psw 

Rhd 24b 79M Rhd' PSW 

RM247 79 m Rhd IT IV/17 <14< PSW 

KM-24* 7V90 RM' psw 

RM 249 79*1 KM I (VII (I) PSW 

Rhd 230 7*92 Khd PSW 

RM-231 7991 RMFHV/|7«u PSW 


IL 13*6 
JL 1221 
IL 1349 
IL 1321 
JL 1169 
JL 1199 
JL 1234 
JL 1171 
IL 1350 
IL 1475 
IL 1430 
IL 1439 
0. 1174 
JL 1370 
IL 125* 
IL 1233 
IL 1334 
a 1393 
a 1157 

a i >44 

a 1367 
a 1443 
a ion 
a 123} 
a 1391 
a 1269 
a 1227 

a 1437 
a 1240 
JL 1237 
a ii97 
a 1290 

a mi 
a i 2 o* 
a 137* 
a 1329 
a 1919 
am* 
a 1294 
a non 
a uii 
a 123* 

a 1223 

a in* 
a t)«t 
a i3*o 
a im 
a i43i 

a 1349 

a mo 
ami 
a uii 
a im 
a mo 
a mi 

a 1349 

a mi 
a 1211 
a u ii 

a 1306 
a m* 
a mi 
a im 

a 1339 
a 1249 
a 1379 
a 1354 
a ms 
a i4i* 

a I]** 

a 1297 

a in* 
a ism 

a 1399 
a 1466 

a i im 
a mi 
a 149) 
a 1432 
a 1444 
a 1444 

a mo 
a mi 
a i ns 
a noi 
JL 1301 
a 1442 

a 1 277 
a mi 
a 1276 
a i4oo 
a M52 

a 1304 

a 1272 

a us* 


Rhd2S2 7994 RM PSW 

RM 25 ) 7993 RMCOWin) PSW 

RM 254 7996 RM' P5W 

Rhd 253 79*7 RM' PSW 

RM236 799* RM' P5W 


RM2S7 «232 RMBIV/t9(10j PSW 
RM23* *233 KMB!V/]9J|J> PSW 
RM-259 *231 RM B JV/19 (12) PSW 

RM 260 7999 RM B 1V/23 (6) PSW 

RM-261 *234 RMBJV/4III) PSW 

RM262 *235 RMBIV/9II5) PSW 

Rhd 263 *236 RMBJV/I9M1) PSW 

RM 264 *237 RM PSW 

RM269 *23* RMFWUlbl PSW 

RM-266 *219 F 56 psw 

RM 267 *240 RM' PSW 

Khd-261 *241 5 PSW 

RM 2*9 *242 RM 436(31 PSW 

RM-270 7960 RM B IV/14 (6) PSW 


F* I 7939 PKA 2D » EXB ? 

Fk-2 7561 PKJ + EXB 296 


Pk-1 

A4 

aj 

Pk* 

Pk-7 

Pk-I 

M 
Pk 10 
Pk-I I 
Pk-12 

au 

Fk 14 
Pk 15 
Pk 16 
Ik-17 
Pk II 
Pk 19 
Pk 20 
Ik-21 
Pk 22 
Pk-21 

Pk 24 
Pk 25 


Ik-26 


Pk2* 
Pk-29 
Pk-30 
Pk l| 
Pk-32 
Pk 33 


Ik-35 
Pk 36 
Pk-,17 


r% 39 
Pk40 
Pk-»l 
Pk*3 
Pk 43 

Pk -44 

Pk-«5 

Pk-46 

Pk-47 

Pk 44 
Pk-49 


7502 PKA 5QI«uv(«,l EXB 577 
7903 PKA 3 H (41) EXB 239 

HO* PKF 3 B (4«i EXB 6371 

7309 PKE 5 R (*) EXB 4*7 

7306 PKA 3 K (41) EXB 612 

7509 PKA 3 G, EXB 742 

I*md r22»i 

7307 PKA 4 ft (I) EXB 1276 

1510 PKE5RCJ* EXB 61* 

1312 PKA 3 G, 1»ii (20w) EXB 601 
15t) PKA 3 a EXB TV 

)■»* 140* I 

1314 PKA 1 G. EXB 140 

luvUOlvJ 

1315 PKA l O. Unv»40ii EXB 519 

1316 PKA 3 P. d444v (14) EXB 1943 

TSI7 PKA 3 K (41) EXB 131 

151* PKA 11 <4te| EXB 141 

7320 PKA 3 F. 14, EXB 1519 

7921 PKA 3 J GO EXB636 

7322 PKA 3 1 <**) EXB 57* 

7323 PKJ! 9 K (7) EXB 707 • 

1326 PKA 2 417) FXB 42? 

7317 PKA I J 43*) EXB 629 

792* PKA I H (36) EXB 1 

7339 PKA j G EXB 


735* 

7S31 

7312 

7333 

7339 
7336 
7937 
753* 
7539 

7340 
7941 
750 
7S4J 
7944 
7545 
7946 
7562 
7547 
754* 
7549 
7990 
7391 
7394 
7996 


PKC 1 D. cm (1) EXB 996 
PKA 3 IL du«n (4) EXB 1009 
PKA 3 G (14) EXB 294 

PKA3G. »Uit (22«| EXB 293 
PKC I C (9( EXB 1299 

PKB 3 .all a EXB 
PKC 3 P (3) EXB 444 

PKC I E. d»» f I (Mi EXB 131* 
PKA 3 I, tlu (2*ci EXB 290 
PKA I H (JO) EXB 291 
PKCJF.nMJ) EXB 160 
PKC 2 K (Mi (4) EXB 7*6 
PKC 2 G <4a) EXB *30 
PKA J II c«)> EXB 292 
PKC 2 F (3a) EXB 4*9 ’ 
PKA JH 431) EXB 2*9 7 
PKC 2 E <2) • EXB 7*7 
PKA I O. luivTu (6) EXB 1320 
PKA 4 M. Uiuv (1* EXB 1116 
PKA 1 0. !u(*ut (71 EXB 1016 
PKA U EXB 443 T 

PKA 4 l_ ii» EXB 13* 
PKA4U«u(J1 EXB 139 
PKA4J.M44 EXB 1373 


Ml 8627 

MJ 8626 

M3 *629 

•*!-» 1621 

MS **2I 

M* |6>8 

Ad 7 *629 

Ml MX) 

M9 IM I 

M-10 *633 

Mil 8622 


AD 74 147 
AO 7412 
AD 74-177 
AD 73-103 
AO 74-123 
AD 74-164 

AD 76126 
AD 7667 
AD 74 ES 

AO H 4 fl A) 

AD 73-94 


EXB 1836 
EXB * 
EXB 2029 
EXB * 
EXB 1753 
EXB XII* 
EXB 1*15 
EXB 
EXB i 
fcXB-* 
EXB 


Ail 

AM 

A.-3 

Aj* 

M>7 

Ai • 


*713 

nil 

*748 

*702 

•704 

•111 


AI A QZ2.( EXB 

ALA II (2*c) EXB 831 

AI A 022. c«U| (22fc) EXB 97* 
Al-A 10 f») EXB ■* 

Al-A 2) 1106) EXB 444) 

AI A 10(7) EXB 7 


a 1461 
a 1456 
IL 1499 
IL 1469 


a 1457 
a 1472 
a 1470 
a 1461 
a 1464 

a uii 
a ini 

a 1474 
a 1435 
a 1469 

a 1460 
a tiu 

IL 1112 

a ii8« 

a 1267; 


P *»6| 


HP n. pd IUY A 
HP II. fit 116935; 
<2> A a 32J 

a JI9 

a 306 E AV 123 

ax* 

AV 135. A: a 314 
AV I2B.A a 313 
AV 13* A a 326 

am 
a 32i 

aJ27;E: AV 149 
AV 142 


ass* 
am 
a 3i8 

a 319.0 AVU* 
a Jio 
a 3i» 
a 331 

AV 144; e JL 341) 
IL 322 
a 307 

FdPD.pL Urr:6 

am 

AVllt 

a 334. B: AV 131 

a 345 
a 323 

a 30*. E AV 122 
a 33*. F AV 152 
AV 14*. C: a 324 
A. 312 
a 330 

a im 

JL 103 

a 334; F: AV 153 
a 943; D AV 143 
a 339; D AV 15* 
AV 127. A a 316 
a 302. C AV 199 
a m. f av im 
a 94i 
a U3 

a 530 

a 309. F AV 121 
a 342. F AV l» 

a in 
axn 

a 16*. A F«nmrt4 
hm«a 
IL 166 


a 1*7 

JL 17a D. AV 102 
DPhLM 


AV97 

AV *4 
AVU 
AV *9 

CmoI 1*61. pi 270 
AV *J 

CmiI 19m, pi 27E 







DATA Blk-I to ?-6 CORRIGENDA 


447 


Bli-1 B473 

B&.2 B67I 

Bft-3 *675 

BW4 1671 

BK-5 1673 

Slid 8676 


2 BLK-165 

BLKLIM 

3 IILK-1975 
2 BLK m 
* BLK-ll 

] BLK 11:9 


EXE 33* AV H 

EXB AV94 

EKE AVM 

EMB l« AV9V 

EXB BOP EL l IF 

EXB AV*. 


Mr Eft 


J*.[T 


Mr LI 


t»6 ms r m emu mi 

RljfiO.E 

7SHJ m i W3C, EXB 

dJTfl i<Jj 

757 L MS I MIC, EMB 410* 

Ot B JA 


ILlt* 

1L1LS 

VSL 


Qrttl 

RZ3J 

777 

PCT 

BikK-h 1971. jL 1a 

0-1 

*173 

E OiltJD 

PSW 

JL L4£d 

GI 

ILU 

B0f4)O 

PS* 

ILtETS 

03 

SL70 

BQfDO 

PSVp 

JLIE76 

CM 

RIM 

A 0|2j G 

psw 

IL i rtf 

0-3 

113* 

ABdlO 

P5W 

IL 11AC 

0 6 

*161 

DO WO 

PS* 

IL11T0 

0-7 

■1« 

DO i<JO 

PS* 

IL 1166 

n-* 

<131 

COfJMJ 

PSW 

awrlBTI.pt IA1 

0-9 

•3M 

BO (4)0 

P3w 

IL 1163 

o-m 

*172 

DflfflO 

PSW 

JL 3462 

an 

*152 

DfliaO 

PSW 

atm ivn.pl 41t Si 

0-12 

<157 

H6 (3) a 

PSW 

ILIJ64 

0-13 

BI6D 

DHiBQ 

PSW 

Jtl U67 

0-14 

*154 

OKkOtaw niA 1 

raw 

IL 1169 

0-L5 

*159 

BO Clio 

raw 

iLim 

G-16 

1137 

a o ti) d 

raw 

ILIITI 

Eld-1 

tut 

MO At 

raw 

JL IMT 

mt 

*151 

HD* 

raw 

IL Lltf 

IH-3 

*193 

l(D * 

raw 

JL [411 

Hd.4 

RL'W 

HD* 

raw 

JL L4H 

tM-5 

RE96 

l!D* 

raw 

JL L3I7 

Jbm 

*l» 

H£? A J 19) 

PSW 

JL 1423 

1*-1 

*L97 

IID* 

raw 

IL 141 ft 

ftl 

*533 

Jk-A Jill III, M2 

xxa 

AV«1 

(CM 

*761 

EL-IS1 

SMfll 

S-P* 


Kfl-I 
Kd-E 
KM 
Kit 4 
R*S 
Kd-6 
Kd-7 
K 4 -I 


Kd-it 
W-Ill 
kJ Lt 

tu.il 


ltd -13 
Kd 14 


Kd IS 
Kd-lft 
Kit 17 


ilw kb 3941, a wjs m ekb t 
15 M KH 3 TO, a IfcftH) EXM 
iJ16 KD 3924. a vl# (il EXB 
Mill KI) a IM* <M EXB 7 
AVJI KD 20211 B InA flit EXB 


4W: KD U5i) EXB 

M0.1 KD 3797. B fll EXE T 
MW KD 17*3. exa 

amrtlftej 

8X17 KD2D1H, Bikini Eb) EXB 
Mil ED mi. HvAtUi EXJi 
DM 7 K BW £*S 

D iill'll iIbj 

MCB KD «11 5. PCO 

BiiVIlLki 

JL5L7 KDUBI.BUintD EXB 
*J|4 KD 3»L EXB 

Bam tut 

»l 7 KD3*7D EXB 

*511 KD J9J7 EXB 

■St* KD«J EXB 


PAJ.pLMiS 

PA 2. pi 74; I 
AV2S 

PA J L pi J4:A 
AVil 
AV t9 

Ktnn. jp. ft. %. 2 
AVXI 

AY 23 
AV2fi 
AV2S» 

XV 31 

AV 22 b 
AVS4 

AVHi 

AVI* 

AVU 


L'-m-l 8TOII LWN-VKL1J 
I III I *795 I. Ill'tilt, PI pir i 


F.K. Aikhia 
Stall CS LMVR'5 


Mr 1 TJTJ 

Mr-1 7 >73 

Mf-5 TITS 

Mr-d TJ74 

1Mr5 7577 

7*-6 757* 

Mr-7 7579 

Vfr-H 757S 

Mr-9 757* 

Mr 10 TJW 

Mr-I L 74H 

Hr>31 73*1 

Mt-n 7SU 

Mr -14 75 *n 

Mr-14 75*7 


MB AM NLDt". 
cJij 84.613 J 
MB 4FH. 
m 15) TO 
MS 4 Kit 

MS 4 HR, 
LTftJTj 
MR I CJ Mil, 

«ul» 85,1*. J 
MR i CWtf, 
kumi 8.1 ■* El 
MR 1 CJfltfi. 
(CUlb RJ 1*16 
MR I CPI, 
ccmrv X) I*,; 
MR FWlfF. 

I 71 R1A 
MR I KEB. 
cuiL 6 r 1 1 TH.a> 
MR N6F. 
ttltl 
sir i me, 
a*EJ>S(4S 
MR I FVC. 

(0 76- E4 
MR I K4B. 

(I] 76.41 
MS L KIA, 
t R5.9J7 


EXB4JW JL2W 
EXB 3517 JL 304 
FJtR 3SWI V5L P 745 A 16 D) 


EXB H 34 JL a» 

EXB 4022 1L ill) 



EXE .IBS* JL 360 

EXB36M JL 111 

EXIXO JL 111 

Exaw* JLm 

EXB 1513 JL 119 


a*4-1 WJ SW|] mi. EXB AV lW 

K miV I7 ilk 

IN-i WC NWD U». EXE AV 107 

Kiiiiin7i7) 

Shrf -3 SWL NAD m, X EXB AV W 


Pfi-t 
Oil 
Nil 
NM 
Nt-3 
NkA 
Nfc-7 
AML 
Nt* 
Nn 10 


TT6L NM U Ci 1 
THJ7 N5 *7 02. KBd 
7T06 N5 rrm,xi«U 

rm nj it k m n 

771M NS *7 P 6E. iui 
TW3 M I7K RA 6, lUa 

7710 N3 R9 IXi.nn 
TW W90P40 

7711 73M9Ca.H 
TTffiL WCMFi * 


OB 503* AVB 

EXB 3*13 iHTipt 

EXB J79R Jbrnfli 

EXB 3496 AV ut 

1XB1E65 JL195 

EXB SEW IL »t 

EXB 63-31 Jimpc !.MAtl 
OB7fJ« JimseiMAlE 
EXB 6*40 JjmHrl.MAEi 
BMW tU 296 


MU [ U5L NEi 

Nrt-1 RA41 Mi 

N6-3 ft451 XD B KB l 


EXB 1117 AV *6, A: IL 34J 
EXB IE 7 J ft, 101 »: AVI* 
EXB I tdl AV *7 


PC-1 K23 PG cul (5) EXB AV ll» 

P| J *tU PCMPHt.tr^ EXH AV IKE 


Skh-l BS4R SKI9 L77T1*) EXB 

SMhS ftW 5KH 17/t {4A) EXB 

5ih-1 *St5 SKH I7ff.1t) EXB 

SAM UMS SxM lWJ(3.i EXB 

5Ah-5 RA44 SEK I7JV 9*1 EXB 

»l*-6 fW4rt SKH [RAI m EXB 

51h 7 «rV4h SXI3 li/Y (|» JLXS 

Sih-I f*33 SKHETJXiRI EXB 

31h-9 H69S 3X11 LLS (7l J-XH 

SfcMPl H*fT 5KH E7/U 11LI EXB 


AV It* 
AV I LI 
AV 117 
AV ILD 
AV Iti 
AV III 
AV rift 
AV 114 
AV US 
AV 116 


■M 

56-2 

Sb-3 


7732 MR 36 J1L 115 EXB JT7I 

7733 MR3B9Q.H3.il EXB J7T1 

mi Mi SB ff I EKB 36*6 


JL2DT 

Jk 3 £l 2 

IL JDJ i A t: V31, 15 


TttH 8770 TBQnAWIfil FSW 

Tm-3 *771 HEQEVLlCiLJ J^W 

Tnj-1 R773 tSQI J*SW | 

71R.4 R773 TKQI J>5W | 

Tni-3 H774 tXQlAU5| J>SW 

Trj-4 1771 TXL,i imi f.ir T5W 

Tiq-7 *774 TP<21A15) PSW 

Tni-lj *777 TR0 ora. pen. P5W 

ThJ-4 *771 IRQ ml* prt PS* 


JL 3*76 
IL 1477 
KJft» 71147611 
Kkd, 3114T6‘j 3 
ft HEJ 
IL 1445 
IL H3A 
JLJ41W 
IL 1 W 


M W2I TTT 

T‘J I92J 717 

T-I 1424 TTf 

74 «Q4 T r 

7-5 itm m 

T4 *m 177 


NMPU Kft AV| | 
Iftntl TC) 

NMPHS103 AV IJ 
IftmnPO 

KHPiS» AV |4 
IftwtlPTl 

VMP85JD4 AV |7 

(0™ PCj 

NMF1JJ0I AV 13 

(ft™ VO 

NMP 15.300 AVI* 

fftnmPO 


COLOUR PLLDTT^APtU 

T4; HI. 36*1. JJ-30, XE, 36 IL 

ttf, t5.12._U.U-I3 AV 


Corrigenda 

Pp 7A, | JO and 416: Him Ticb iod in^nm™ m uni: it* nl»» Ip. 416) 
H M-ii* VvtuM hmn fa*, ilwm. A |i mpnhet ™, p I3lk 
r. Ill- InBEAd of M-ICAlArerf M-1L99 ALd 
P. 131 l^c« eiiri-Lidil Ik HrtphuiJiiif Jd-t LIuippa tad tfut nw-L 
444 if* > uMKOiiuir ILarlv Ilarappaii 


r 






























' 

























CAr *'.or„ 















Central Archaeological Library, 

NEW DELHI- g 1453 


CaH X° R prT^-J?U( fW_ 

Author- 4 &*(>'** 

W-L- 




GOVT OF INDIA '£j 

Department of Archaeology ^ 

O 

NEW DELHI 

IMeade 

help us to keep the book 


clean ami moving. 
































