133 
be a direct11 relation between the two (Mackay 1938: 363). 
One of the most interesting and important features of the 
copper tablets is the clear interrelation between the inscrip-
tion and the accompanying iconographic motif that prevails in 
this object category.12 This was as early correctly con-
cluded as by Mackay (1931: 400): “The fact that all of the 
tablets bearing the representation of a hare have the 
same inscription on the obverse ... , and that the animals 
with long curling horns and long tail also bear the same 
inscription —different, however, from the inscription on 
the hare tablets ...—, suggests that in some cases at least 
the inscription on the tablet refers in some way to the 
animal on the tablet. Of three tablets, each with an ele-
phant engraved upon it, all bear the same inscription 
...”.13 It is very clear that there are many groups of identi-
cal copper tablets, and that often (a part of) the inscrip-
tion on the obverse side or the iconographic motif on the 
reverse is enough to predict what is engraved on the 
other side. 
 In the accompanying table I have included only copper 
tablets whose typological classification I consider certain, 
regardless of their actual state of preservation —in some 
cases, relatively few traces of the Indus signs or the motif 
will suffice [Fig 1a-b]. Some of the remaining tablets could 
have been assigned as uncertain additional examples to 
the determined 46 classes, but I have preferred to exclude 
them from the analysis together with the completely 
illegible ones.  
 Instead of showing all duplicate tablets, as was done by 
Pande and Yule, I present for each type only the original 
text of the inscription on the obverse and the text or 
iconographic motif on the reverse as it can be recon-
structed from the extant examples. Their frequency is 
indicated in the right upper corner. Tentative reconstruc-
tions are indicated by broken lines. 
 
Typology 
 
The copper tablets appear to have been cut to definite 
sizes. Three classes can be distinguished according to size 
and shape (Mackay 1938: 368):14 
 
A = square tablets (N=34); average measurements:15 
26.6 x 26.5 x 3.5 mm 
B =  rectangular tablets (N=144); 33.8 x 26.5 x 3.5 mm 
C =  long and narrow (rectangular) tablets (N=39); 
33.0 x 24.0 x 3.0 mm 
 
Within each class, the next sorting criterion is the in-
scription or iconographic motif on the reverse. The in-
scription on the obverse is the other diagnostic criterion. 
The addition of another (upper) line of inscription on 
either the obverse (as in A3, B15 and B17) or on the re-
verse (as in A1 and B12), or the reversed direction of writ-
ing in the inscription(s) (as in C4 and C5) distinguishes 
subtypes.  
 
The iconographic motifs  
 
Because opinions differ as to what the different icono-
graphic motifs represent, it is necessary to specify my 
own interpretations: 
A1: A backwards looking deer with branching horns. 
A2: A backwards looking human-faced and buffalo-
horned composite animal with the body of a deer (cf. 
A1) and a snake for a tail; there is a star in both loops 
of the horns, and a branch of some plant in the mid-
dle of the horns. 
A3: The ‘endless knot’ (in Near Eastern and later Indian 
art, formed by two snakes).  
B1: ‘Unicorn’ with a manger (instead of the usual ‘cult 
object’). 
B2-B3: Zebu bull16 with a manger. 
B4: Water buffalo with a manger. 
B5: Rhinoceros with a manger. 
B6: Elephant with a manger. 
B7: Hare with a bush. 
B8-B9: The markhor-goat (or a composite animal con-
sisting of the horns and tail of the markhor and the 
head and body of a ‘unicorn’ bull, with a kidney-
shaped figure in the forepart of the body: cf. B1).17  
B10: A composite animal with two front halfs stuck to-
gether, with the horns of a zebu, the head of a tiger 
(?) and the front body of a ‘unicorn’ bull. 
B11: A composite animal with the horns of a markhor-
goat, the head and front part of a camel, and the back 
part of a water buffalo. 
B12: A tiger with the horns of a zebu. 
B13: A composite animal with the horns of a zebu, the 
head and front part of a tiger, and the back part of a 
water buffalo. 
B14: A composite animal with the horns of a zebu, the 
head and front part of an elephant, the back part of a 
rhinoceros, and a snake for a tail.  
B15-B16: A composite animal with the horns of a urus-
bull,18 the head and the forepart of a dog,19 and the 
back part of a rhinoceros; in front of this animal 
stands a manger. 
B17-B18: The head20 and neck of a camel; the body of a 
rhinoceros; and a horned snake for a tail.21. 
B19: A human-shaped archer (with a bow in the left 
hand and three arrows in the right hand) having 
goat-like elongated eyes, horns (of a zebu?), a plait of 
hair behind the head, a long tail, and a body covered 
with hair or a dress made of hides, leaves, or feathers. 
C1: The ‘shield’ or ‘double-axe’motif. 
C2-C10: All the remaining reverses bear signs of the In-
dus script.22  
 
It is striking that while the reverses of the most common, 
rectangular (B) tablets never show inscriptions but only 
iconographic motifs, Indus script predominates on the 
reverse of the two remaining types, both square (A: 8 out 
of the 11 main types) and longish rectangular, particu-
larly the latter (C: only 1 type out of the 9 where the re-
verse is legible has an iconographic motif, the rest have 
script).  
 
‘Pictorial bilinguals’ 
 
In Fig. 1a-b certain types have a thicker frame than the 
others. Each of these is linked to another tablet type 
through an identical inscription, normally the inscription 
on the obverse consisting of at least three but often many 
