A p p e n d i x
Compounds ending in the word m in in T am il 
Lexicon
The various ligatures and compounds having the ‘fish’ sign as 
their basic element constitute one of the principal clues to the 
Indus script. As long as all of them have not been satisfactorily 
explained, they are likely to remain among the principal targets of 
further research. In this search for new solutions, an exhaustive 
list of all compounds ending in the word mi!} (‘fish’ as well as 
‘star’) that actually occur in the Dravidian languages would be an 
ideal tool to suggest various possible lines of enquiry. The 
following list naturally falls short of such an ideal; similar lists 
covering other Dravidian languages would contain entries not 
found here (compare, for example, Pengo bofu min ‘a kind of fish’ 
quoted in § 14.4 from D ED R 4498, and Malayalam kölä-m in 
‘needle-fish’ in DEDR 2241). The basis of the present list is the 
unpublished reverse index to the entries in T am il Lexicon 
compiled by Eric Grinstead et al. (see Preface). The list contains 
34 compounds denoting stars and 65 compounds denoting fish, 
prefixed with the codes S ( =  star) and F ( =  fish) for ready 
reference (codes in parentheses register meanings attested for the 
first part of the compound, without the addition of the word mi!}); 
several compounds belong to both groups. The information 
given in T am il Lexicon (including the Tamil glosses, quotations 
of source texts [with the compounds split into their components 
by means ofhyphenation], and secondary compounds) is supple­
mented, if possible, with the literal meaning of the first 
member(s) of the compound (with references to D EDR) and with 
cross-references (including references to sections of the present 
book). Some compounds not found as entries in T am il Lexicon 
have been added, including kula-mi!} and mu-m-mi!}, which are 
attested in Old Tamil, and others given as Tamil glosses on the 
entry words. Note that the ordinal numbers of the lunar asterisms 
are those given in Tam il Lexicon and valid today, not those of the 
early Vedic calendar: the Pleiades, for example, are the third (and 
not the first) naksatra (§ 1 1.2). The list follows the order of the 
Tamil alphabet.
F  
arakkulii-m i!} =  arkku lii ‘seer-fish’, bluish above, silvery 
below, attaining 4 inches in length, Cybium commersonii; 
kafal-m t!}-vakai [‘kind of sea-fish’].
S 
aru-mi!} [aru - ‘6’, DEDR 2485] ‘Pleiades, as containing six
stars; k iirttik a i (Piilkala-nikantu). [See § 10.4.]
I,
279
