GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA 

DEPARTMENT  OF  ARCHAEOLOGY 

CENTRAL  ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 


AxMERICAN  ORIENTAL  SERIES 
VOLUME  20 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 

1935-36 


AMERICAN  ORIENTAL  SERIES 


VOLUME  20 


Editor 

W.  NORMAN  BROWN 


Associate  Editors 


JOHN  K.  SHRYOCK 


E.  A.  SPEISER 


AMERICAN  ORIENTAL  SOCIETY 
NEW  HAVEN,  CONNECTICUT 


1943 


PAINTED  POTTERY;  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


FRONTISPIECE  (a) 


Pamtcd  hy  Suzanne  E-  Chapman 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 

1935-36 


BY 

ERNEST  J.  H.  MACKAY 


Published  for 

AMERICAN  SCHOOL  OF  INDIC  AND  IRANIAN  STUDIES 

AND 

MUSEUM  OF  FINE  ARTS,  BOSTON 


BY 


AMERICAN  ORIENTAL  SOCIETY 

NEW  HAVEN,  CONNECTICUT 


A contribution  jrom  the  American  Council  of  Learned 
Societies  has  assisted  in  the  publication 
of  this  volume 


iRAL  ARCHAEOl'^  jIGau 

library,  new 

..CO  i\o  . 

■ ■ 7/rf^.- 

473.  ^ A?/ ' 

Call  — -****^y- 


Copyright  1943 

By  American  Ordsntaz,  Society 


MADE  IN  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


central 
lAWi  ■ 
Acc. 

ih\>- 

Hoi;  A;'  ..  . 


Ml/  

^ 

Z.Wa- 


J.  H.  FURST  COAIPANY,  BALTIMORE,  MARYLAND 


PREFACE 


The  three  ancient  mounds  of  Chanhu-daro  are  situated  a little  over  half-a-mile  south 
of  the  modern  village  of  Jamal-Kirio,  near  Sakrand  in  the  Nawabshah  District  of  Sindh. 
The  left  bank  of  the  river  Indus  is  now  twelve  miles  distant,  but  in  the  third  millennium 
B.C.,  the  river,  or  a branch  of  it,  flowed  close  beside  the  city;  more  than  once,  indeed,  it 
threatened  its  total  destruction.  The  Khirthar  Mountains,  in  Baluchistan,  some  thirty-seven 
miles  distant  from  the  mounds,  are  crossed  by  a pass  which  is  used  by  caravans  to  this  day, 
as  there  is  a plentiful  supply  of  fresh  water.  The  ancient  city  was  therefore  very  favourably 
situated  for  trade  both  by  land  and  sea. 

In  February,  1931,  the  late  Mr.  N.  G.  Majumdar,  Assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  came  upon  the  site  in  the  course  of  his  survey  of  the  ancient 
sites  of  Sindh  for  the  Government  of  India.  After  three  weeks’  examination  of  the  mounds, 
he  left  in  March,  satisfied  as  to  their  date  and  their  importance.  From  his  admirable  report 
on  this  and  other  ancient  sites  of  Sindh,*  Professor  W.  Norman  Brown  and  I selected 
Chanhu-daro  for  excavation  by  tbe  first  American  Archaeological  Expedition  to  India. 

Plate  I shows  the  relative  extent  and  position  of  the  three  mounds  (I-III)  of  the 
ancient  city,  whose  original  name  we  do  not  know.  The  largest  (No.  II)  is  some  1,060  feet 
in  circumference  and  stood  23.5  feet  high  from  datum  level  before  excavation.  The  smallest 
(No.  Ill),  to  the  north-west  of  Mound  II,  is  only  450  feet  in  circumference  and  is  now 
12.5  feet  in  height.  Mound  I lies  to  the  south-west  of  Mound  II  and  is  separated  from  it 
by  a gap  about  150  feet  wide.  This  last  mound,  being  more  compact  in  shape,  is  more 
impressive  than  Mound  II,  though  its  height  (22.2  feet)  and  circumference  (about  950 
feet)  are  actually  somewhat  less.  All  three  mounds  are  of  the  same  date  and  were  originally 
one  and  undivided,  but  many  winter  and  summer  rains  have  enhanced  the  effects  of 
floods  of  ancient  days;  indeed,  the  present  wide  separation  of  Mounds  I and  II  was  originally 
caused  by  a cataclysmic  flood  which  cut  through  the  heart  of  the  city. 

According  to  a resident  of  the  little  village  of  Jamal-Kirio,  who  is  a Professor  at  the 
Sind  Gollege,  Karachi,  the  name  Chanhu-daro  is  derived  from  the  names  of  two  sisters, 
Ghanhiyun  and  Bohiyun,  of  whom  nothing  else  is  known;  daro  in  Sindhi  means  a “ place.” 
Which  mound  is  Ghanhiyun  and  which  Bohivun  I was  unable  to  ascertain,  and  these  names 
are  probably  much  older  than  their  Sindhi  equivalents.  There  is  no  fixed  tradition  in  the 
neighbourhood  as  to  the  origin  of  the  mounds,  but  a great  black  snake,  said  to  have  been 
many  yards  long,  is  associated  with  them  in  village  legend.  It  is  quite  possible  that  this 
serpent  was  simply  a king  cobra  magnified  by  tradition,  for  snakes  are  quite  commonly 
found  among  the  ancient  mounds  of  Sindh.  In  the  course  of  our  excavations  we  came  upon 
several  snakes,  all  of  normal  size,  hibernating  deep  in  the  ruins. 

Between  Mounds  II  and  III  there  lies  the  simple  tomb  of  a local  saint,  Kbalil  Pir.‘ 
Tbis  tomb  is  regarded  as  sacred  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  but  nothing  is  known  of 

'^Explorations  in  Sind  [Mem.  Arch.  Sttrv.  Ind.  No.  48,  1934]. 

2 PI.  I,  square  4/E. 


VI 


PREFACE 


the  saint  except  that  he  was  a stranger  and  was  buried  there  about  a hundred  years  ago. 
Placed  on  slightly  rising  ground  (Pi.  IX,  e)  and  orientated  north  to  south,  the  tomb 
measures  eight  feet  in  length  by  four  feet  wide.  Over  its  rough  superstructure  of  bricks 
taken  from  the  ancient  mounds,  a coarse  white  cotton  sheet  had  been  laid  with  its  edges 
held  down  by  pieces  of  brick,  the  whole  giving  a realistic  impression  of  a dead  man  laid 
upon  a bier.  About  nine  feet  to  the  north-west  of  the  tomb  stands  a very  old  jhal  tree; 
another  to  the  south-west  of  the  tomb  is  now  dead.  On  our  arrival  at  the  site  we  found  the 
tomb  surrounded  by  a low  zareba  of  dead  thorn  branches  in  order  to  keep  the  cattle  away, 
and  we  substituted  a circular  bank  of  earth  to  protect  it  more  effectively. 

Tw'o  brushes  of  ordinary  village  make  hang  from  the  adjacent  tree  and  are  used  by 
petitioners  to  sweep  the  shroud  and  the  surrounding  ground.  Women  do  not  visit  the 
tomb;  it  is  the  men  who  bring  a thank-offering  there  after  the  birth  of  a son.  When  the 
child  is  about  seven  months  old,  his  hair  is  ceremonially  cut  near  the  tomb  and  is  then 
placed  upon  it  in  a triangular  bag  ornamented  round  the  edges  with  little  coloured  tufts  of 
wool.  An  old  villager  told  me  that  many  years  ago  a man  who  was  in  urgent  need  of  a 
hundred  rupees  prayed  at  the  tomb  that  this  sum  might  be  granted  to  him.  After  spending 
the  night  there,  he  saw  a large  bag  of  money  on  the  tomb,  but  when  he  picked  it  up  and 
turned  to  go  an  invisible  wall  prevented  his  departure  and  the  money  vanished.  He  prayed 
throughout  the  second  day  and  again  saw  the  bag  of  money.  This  time  he  opened  it  and 
took  out  the  hundred  rupees  for  which  he  had  asked.  He  was  then  permitted  to  return  to 
his  home  with  it. 

On  the  arrival  of  my  Indian  assistants  and  myself  at  the  site  on  October  23rd,  1935, 
the  preparation  of  the  camp  was  begun.  For  the  first  few  days,  however,  until  October 
27th,  it  was  more  convenient  to  live  in  the  P.  W.  D.  dak  bungalow  at  Sakrand  and  to 
travel  to  and  fro  by  train  until  the  camp  and  equipment  were  ready.  I have  to  thank  Mr. 
S.  A.  Maybury  Lewis,  I.  S.  E.,  for  permission  to  occupy  the  bungalow  and  for  much 
valuable  assistance.  Mr.  S.  B.  Rege,  Executive  Engineer,  Nawabshah,  and  Mr.  D.  Bilani, 
Assistant  Engineer,  P.  W.  D.,  Sakrand,  were  also  very  ready  with  their  help;  I am  grateful 
to  them  for  their  many  courtesies. 

After  making  a survey  of  the  mounds  and  marking  out  the  whole  area  into  squares  of 
50  feet,  we  commenced  the  actual  excavation  on  November  2nd.  A suitable  datum  level 
had  to  be  chosen  and  this  was  marked  by  a solid  structure  of  brick  and  cement  close  to  our 
camp.  By  the  help  of  the  P.  W.  D.,  this  datum  level  was  later  correlated  with  an  official 
bench-mark  in  the  village  of  Jam  Dahri,  about  three  miles  away.  The  level  there,  95.45 
feet  above  low-water  ordinary  Spring  Tide  at  Karachi,  was  marked  at  our  camp  by  a 
concrete  floor  in  a small  brick-lined  pit;  but  as  we  had  to  start  levelling  before  the  correlation 
could  be  made,  our  working  datum-level  was  five  feet  higher,  and  was  thus  100.45  feet 
above  sea-level.^ 

It  had  been  my  practice  at  Mohenjo-daro  to  give  a number,  or  numbers,  to  each 
room  or  find-spot.  These  numbers  were  carried  down  to  the  lowest  levels  of  the  excavations 

’ Sunk  to  the  east  of  Mound  II,  just  outside  our  zareba. 


PREFACE 


vii 

and,  as  it  happened,  the  system  was  simplihed  by  the  fact  that  buildings  of  the  various 
levels  had  been  erected  one  above  the  other  with  little  alteration  in  alignment.  At  Chanhu- 
daro,  however,  the  walls  of  one  occupation  seldom  rested  on  the  walls  of  the  occupation 
beneath,  so  that  the  greatest  care  had  to  be  taken  that  our  numbers  were  not  shifted  as  we 
removed  one  stratum  to  examine  another.  I am  satished,  however,  that  even  in  open  ground 
the  deviation  of  our  numbered  pegs  was  very  slight  and  there  was  practically  none  at  all 
where  brick  walling  was  found  below  brick  walling.  Such  few  deviations  as  have  been 
neeessitated  in  the  numbering  on  the  plans  for  the  need  of  clearness  are  in  no  case  of 
actual  importance. 

The  numbering  of  the  squares  will  assist  the  reader  to  find  his  place  on  the  plans. 
These  should  be  read  to  the  right  and  upwards. 

The  system  of  field-cards  which  I introduced  and  used  for  several  years  at  Mohenjo- 
daro  was  employed  again  at  Chanhu-daro.  These  cards  were  filled  in  with  the  locus  and 
level  of  each  object  before  its  removal  from  the  find-spot.  The  cards  were  then  brought 
with  the  finds  to  our  workroom  where  the  records  were  completed  by  my  wife  or  myself. 
In  all  we  had  some  5,000  cards,  referring  to  an  equal  number  of  finds  to  be  classified  at  the 
end  of  the  season.* 

We  had  so  many  visitors  that  we  had  eventually  to  put  a thorn  hedge  round  the  camp 
in  order  to  avoid  breakage  of  the  larger  finds,  particularly  potter)^  spread  out  to  dry  after 
washing.  On  holidays  only  we  admitted  a few  people  at  a time.  Our  Sindhi  visitors  were 
always  very  welcome,  but  it  was  sometimes  difficult  to  convince  them  that  we  had  a large 
amount  of  work  to  do  and  little  time  in  which  to  do  it.® 

For  our  Indian  staff  I have  nothing  but  praise.  Mr.  Ghulam  Mohi-ud-Din,  our 
draughtsman,  was  especially  valuable  as  he  had  already  worked  with  me  at  Mohenjo-daro. 
Mr.  Gulzar  Muhammed  Kahn,  who  was  responsible  for  the  photography,  was  also  a valued 
friend  from  the  same  site;  and  a third,  Mr.  Kadir  Bux,  was  once  more  in  charge  of  the 
labour  and  pay-sheets. 

Mr.  H.  D.  Sankalia,  a student  under  Father  Heras,  Director  of  the  Indian  Research 
Institute,  Bombay,  worked  with  me  at  the  latter’s  request  from  November  29th  to  December 
20th,  1935.  On  January  14th,  1936,  my  wife  arrwed  at  the  camp  from  England,  and  the 
line  plates  in  this  book  will  testify  to  the  skill  with  which  she  drew  most  of  the  smaller 
objects  that  we  found.  From  January  19th  till  the  28th,  we  had  the  pleasure  of  the 
company  of  Dr.  M.  B.  Emeneau  from  America.  During  this  time  he  studied  certain 
peculiarities  of  the  Brahui  language  with  the  willing  assistance  of  our  Brahui  headman, 
Daud  Muhammed. 

Mr.  M.  S.  Vats,  Superintendent  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  visited  the 
excavations  from  December  nth  until  the  13th,  1935,  and  Mr.  J.  F.  Blakiston,  Director 

^ Some  of  the  finds  were  of  little  importance,  and  they  were  reburied  in  a pit  after  they  had  been 
inspected  by  the  officials  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India. 

® The  local  Sindhis,  even  the  simple  peasants,  took  a very  welcome  interest  in  our  work,  far 
greater,  indeed,  than  anything  I have  experienced  before  in  an  eastern  country. 


Vlll 


PREFACE 


General  of  Archaeology  in  India,  was  with  us  from  Januar)^  21st  until  the  23rd.  We  closed 
down  actual  excavation  work  on  March  26th,  1936. 

It  had  been  arranged  that  the  division  of  the  finds  with  the  Archaeological  Department 
should  be  made  on  the  spot  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  transport  costs.  Accordingly, 
Dr.  C.  L.  Fahri  came  to  Chanhu-daro  from  Mohenjo-daro  on  March  14th,  and  was  followed 
on  the  1 6th  by  Mr.  K.  N.  Dikshit,  then  Deputy  Director  General  (now  Director  General). 
With  the  friendly  cooperation  of  all  concerned,  the  division  of  the  finds,  with  the  exception 
of  small  objects  like  seals  and  beads,  was  accomplished  in  four  days.  After  Mr.  Dikshit 
had  returned  to  Delhi,  Mr.  K.  N.  Puri,  from  Mohenjo-daro,  started  packing  up  those  objects 
which  were  to  be  retained  by  the  Government  of  India.  We  ourselves  had  the  double  task 
of  packing  the  finds  allotted  to  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  which  were  to  go  to 
America  via  Karachi,  and  the  smaller  finds,  which  were  to  be  taken  to  Delhi  for  division. 

On  March  3 1 st,  my  wife  and  I closed  down  the  camp;  we  arrived  in  Delhi  on  April 
2nd.  In  addition  to  the  smaller  finds  we  had  brought  with  us,  there  were  also  several 
hundred  bronze  and  copper  objects  to  be  divided  between  the  Government  of  India  and 
Boston.  These  had  been  sent  some  weeks  ahead  and  had  been  chemically  cleaned  by  Khan 
Bahadur  Muhammed  Sana  Ullah,  the  Archaeological  Ghemist  in  India,  who  with  great 
skill  and  patience  had  separated  them  out  from  the  corroded  masses  in  which  many  of  them 
were  found.  When  the  division  had  been  completed,  my  wife  and  I were  engaged  for  some 
time  in  making  drawings  of  these  metal  objects,  for  the  heavy  crust  on  them  had  made  it 
impossible  to  do  this  in  the  field.  After  packing  and  despatching  the  share  allotted  to 
the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  we  left  for  England  on  April  23rd. 

We  should  like  to  express  here  our  very  sincere  thanks  to  the  Government  of  India  and 
to  the  Director  General  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  for  the  great  interest  shown  in  this 
first  archaeological  expedition  to  India  under  the  amended  Monuments  Act.  They  assisted 
us  in  many  and  various  ways  and  in  fact  could  not  have  done  more  to  promote  the  success 
of  this  American  expedition— a very  happy  augury  for  further  archaeological  work  in  India. 

Lastly,  we  wish  to  thank  the  Director  of  the  Musepm  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  and  his 
staff  for  their  devoted  interest  throughout  the  excavations  and  since.  To  Miss  Ardelia  Ripley 
Flail  especially  we  are  indebted  for  the  attention  and  thought  she  has  bestowed  to  our  many 
needs,  which  have  included  the  photographing  and  expert  examination  of  many  objects 
after  they  had  been  cleaned.  Mrs.  N.  de  G.  Davies  and  Aliss  Suzanne  E.  Ghapman  are 
responsible  for  the  clever  fac-simile  copies  of  sherds  shown  in  colour  in  the  Frontispiece 
and  Pi.  XXIII,  for  which  we  are  vety'  grateful.  The  valuable  assistance  of  those  American 
experts  who  have  so  kindly  made  scientific  reports  on  the  finds  is  gratefully  acknowledged 
elsewhere. 

Aly  wife  was  responsible  for  most  of  the  line  drawings  of  small  objects  other  than  the 
pottery  forms,  and  she  rendered  invaluable  assistance  in  recording  the  many  objects  brought 
into  the  camp. 

Throughout  this  book  I have  used  the  term  “ Harappa  Gulture  ” in  place  of  “ Indus 
Valley  Gulture.”  It  was  at  Ffarappa  in  the  Montgomery  District  of  the  Panjab  that  the 
remains  were  first  discovered  of  this  civilization  whose  cities  some  five  thousand  years  ago 


PREFACE 


IX 


were  scattered  over  a wide  area  of  north-west  India,  and  whose  influence  was  probably  felt 
over  the  greater  part  of  the  then  Indian  world.  In  thus  associating  a civilization  with  the 
site  at  which  evidences  of  it  were  first  unearthed,  we  are  following  the  established  custom 
of  modern  archaeology.  “ Indus  Valley  Culture  ” is  too  elastic  a term  to  be  any  longer  used; 
since  it  was  first  employed  three  entirely  different  cultures  have  been  revealed  by  the  spade 
and  named  after  the  places  in  the  Indus  Valley  at  which  they  were  found;  namely, 
“Amri,”  “ Jhukar,”  and  “Jhangar.”®  The  first  of  these,  the  Amri  Culture,  is  definitely 
earlier  than  the  Harappa  civilization,  and  the  second  and  third,  the  Jhukar  and  Jhangar 
Cultures,  followed  the  Harappa  Culture  after  a considerable  lapse  of  time.  Traces  of 
these  last  two  cultures  were  found  in  the  upper  levels  of  Mound  II  and  are  described  in 
Chapters  VII  and  VIII  of  this  book. 

If  we  were  not  so  well  acquainted  with  the  craftmanship  of  the  people  of  the  Harappa 
Culture  as  it  is  exemplified  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  we  might  have  found  it  difficult 
to  distinguish  between  the  products  of  the  Jhukar  people  and  those  of  the  Harappa  people 
in  the  Chanhu-daro  mounds.  The  upper  part  of  Mound  II  has  been  considerably  disturbed 
in  the  search  for  building  material;  for  successive  occupations  took  toll  not  only  of  the 
bricks  scattered  about  on  the  surface,  but  of  those  that  could  be  dug  up  from  the  debris  of 
previous  occupations.  The  fillings  were  cleared  from  older  houses  and  their  walls  de- 
molished for  their  bricks,  with  the  result  that  comparatively  few  objects  were  found  in 
their  original  positions.  The  Jhukar  people,  it  is  suspected,  even  kept  as  souvenirs  certain 
of  the  objects  of  Harappa  date  that  they  found  in  these  forays  into  the  lower  levels  of  the 
mound.  For  instance,  the  pins  with  coiled  heads  (1630,  1659)  illustrated  in  PI.  LXXII, 
21,  22  were  found  as  high  as  16.7  feet  above  datum  level;  ^ unless  this  type  of  pin  was  also 
made  by  the  Jhukar  people,  which  seems  unlikely,  despite  its  simplicitv,  we  can  only 
suppose  that  somebody  of  the  Jhukar  people  found  it  at  a lower  level  and  reused  it  for 
their  clothing  or  their  hair.  Fortunately  this  uncertainty  does  not  effect  the  potter}^  or  the 
seals.  Though  there  was,  of  course,  a certain  amount  of  overlapping  in  the  case  of  the 
potter)^  very  few  specimens  of  the  Jhukar  ware— and  especially  of  the  painted  ware— could 
not  be  easily  distinguished  from  the  earlier  Harappa  wares,  as  we  shall  show  later  on  in 
this  book.  The  stratum  which  produced  the  Jhukar  pottery  varied  somewhat  in  level,  for 
by  the  time  of  the  Jhukar  occupation  the  top  of  Mound  II  was  far  from  being  flat;  it  ranged 
from  13.7  feet  above  datum  on  the  east  to  17.8  feet  above  datum  on  the  west. 


® N.  G.  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind  [Mem.  Arch.  Sitrv.  hid.  No.  48]. 
^Another  mutilated  specimen  of  the  same  type  occurred  at  the  level  21.0 feet. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

Chapter  page 

I Trenches i 

ixiE  Cutting 12 

IF  Mound  II  (Upper  Levels) 23 

IV  Mound  IL  Second  Harappa  Occupation 37 

V Mound  I 59 

VI  Pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture 65 

VII  Pottery  of  the  Jhukar  Culture 103 

VIII  Later  Wares,  and  Stone  and  Faience  Vessels 132 

IX  Seals,  Seal-amulets,  and  Seal  Impressions 140 

X Figurines  AND  Model  Animals 151 

XI  Toys  and  Playthings 162 

XII  Copper  and  Bronze  Objects  and  Utensils 174 

XIII  Personal  Ornaments 190 

XIV  Miscellaneous  Objects 215 

XV  Objects  of  Scientific  Interest,  by  A.  S.  Hemmy,  Ardelia  Ripley 
Hall,  Glover  M.  Allen,  F.  J.  F.  Shaw,  W.  J.  Clench,  and 
A.  Lucas 236 

XVI  Skull  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  by  Wilton  Marion  Krogman  and 

William  Henry  Sassaman 252 

Bibliography 265 

Catalogue  of  Illustrated  Objects 269 

Index 323 


xi 


LIST  OF  PLATES 


Frontispiece  Coloured  plates  of  Flarappa  and  Jhukar  Pottery. 

I  Plan  of  Mounds  I,  II,  III,  showing  relative  positions. 

II  Plan  of  Mound  I. 

III  Plan  of  Alound  II,  showing  Upper  Harappa  Level  and  Trenches. 

IV  Plan  of  Mound  II,  showing  Harappa  II  Occupation. 

V  Se^*^'  ^ ^ _ J II.  Harappa  I and  11  Occupations. 

VI  Lille  )wing  structures  in  Trenches  and  Cutting. 

VII  Sections  of  nortnern  and  western  sides  of  Cutting. 

VIII  Plan  of  FurnaceC?),  Mound  II,  Harappa  II  Occupation. 

IX  Various  view';  f Mounds  I and  II.  (Photographs) 

X  View's  of  details  in  Trenches  F(i);  H(i);  A(i).  (Photographs) 

XI  Views  of  details  in  Trenches  6(5);  E(i);  F(i).  (Photographs) 

XII  View's  of  structures  in  Cutting.  (Photographs) 

XIII  VIound  II.  View's  of  excavations,  Harappa  I and  II  Levels. 

XIV  Mound  II.  View  of  excavations  from  south-west.  Harappa  I and  II 

Occupations. 

XV  Panoramic  view'  of  Mound  II,  show'ing  Harappa  I and  II  Occupations. 
From  north-east. 


XVI  Mounds  I and  II.  Photographs  of  various  details. 

XVII  Mound  II.  Photographs  of  various  details. 

XVIII  Mound  II.  Structures  belonging  to  the  Harappa  I and  II  Occupations. 
XIX  Mound  II.  Photographs  of  Harappa  I and  II  remains. 

XX  Mound  II.  Harappa  II  structures. 

XXI  Mound  II.  Harappa  II  structures. 

XXII  Mound  1.  View's  of  excavations. 


XXIII  Coloured  plate  of  Harappa  Pottery. 

XXIV  Line  draw'ings  of  Storage  jars:  Harappa  Culture. 

XXV  Line  drawings  of  Harappa  Pottery. 

XXVI  Line  draw’ings  of  Harappa  Pottery. 

XXVII  Line  draw'ings  of  Harappa  Pottery. 

XXVIII  Line  draw’ings  of  Harappa  Pottery. 

XXIX  Line  draw’ings  of  Harappa  Pottery;  stone  vessels,  faience  jars  and  other 
objects. 

XXX  Line  drawings  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

XXXI  Line  draw’ings  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

XXXII  Line  draw’ings  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

XXXIII  Line  draw'ings  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 


xiii 


XIV 


LIST  OF  PLATES 


XXXIV 

XXXV 

XXXVI 

XXXVII 

XXXVIII 

XXXIX 

XL 

XLI 

XLII 

XLIII 

XLIV 

XLV 

XLVI 

XLVII 

XLVIII 

XLIX 

L 

LI 

LII 

LIII 

LIV 

LV 

LVI 

LVII 

LVIII 

LIX 

LX 

LXI 

LXII 

LXIII 

LXIV 

LXV 

LXVI 

LXVII 

LXVIII 

LXIX 

LXX 

LXXI 

LXXII 

LXXIII 

LXXIV 


Line  drawings  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  and  Jhuhar  Cultures. 
Photographs  of  Storage  jars  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Photographs  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Photographs  of  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Photographs  of  incised  sherds  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Photographs  of  potter)'  of  the  Jhangar,  Jhukar  and  Harappa  Cultures. 
Line  drawings  of  pottery  of  the  Muhammedan  Period  and  Jhangar  and 
Jhukar  Cultures. 

Line  drawings  of  pottery  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Line  drawings  of  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Line  drawings  of  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Line  drawings  of  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Photographs  of  sherds  of  the  Trihni  and  Jhukar  Cultures. 

Photographs  of  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Photographs  of  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Photographs  of  incised  pottery  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Seals  and  Amulets;  Jhukar  Culture. 

Seals  and  Amulets;  Jhukar  Culture. 

Seal-amulets;  Harappa  Culture. 

Seal-amulets;  Harappa  Culture. 

Pottery  Figurines. 

Pottery  Figurines. 

Model  Animals  in  Pottery. 

Model  Animals  in  Pottery. 

Model  Animals  in  Paste  and  Pottery. 

Toys;  Harappa  Culture. 

Toys  and  Playthings. 

Gamesmen,  Dice  and  Cones,  Etc. 

Pottery  Rattles;  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Group;  Harappa  Culture  (No.  2529). 

Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2529;  2525;  2384);  Harappa  Culture. 
Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2593);  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2593);  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2593;  2199);  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2596;  2360;  2382);  Harappa  Culture. 
Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2365);  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2290;  3145;  3324):  Harappa  Culture. 
Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements:  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements:  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Objects:  Harappa  and  Jhukar(?)  Cultures. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Objects:  Harappa  Culture. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements:  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs. 


LIST  OF  PLATES 


XV 


LXXV 
LXXVI 
LXX\XI 
LXXVIII 
LXXIX 
LXXX 
LXXXI 
LXXXII 
LXXXIII 
LXXXIV 
LXXXV 
LXXXM,  a. 
LXXXVL  b. 
LXXXVII 
LXXXVIII 
LXXXIX 
XC 
XCI 
XCII 
XCIII 
XCIV 


xcv 

xc\a 


Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements;  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs. 
Copper  and  Bronze  Implements  and  Tools:  Harappa  Culture. 

Pottery,  Faience  and  Shell  Bangles:  Harappa  Culture. 

Buttons  and  other  Ornaments:  Harappa  Culture. 

Decorated  Carnelian  Beads;  Harappa  Culture. 

Beads  and  Bead-tools:  Harappa  Culture. 

Beads:  Harappa  Culture. 

Stone  and  Glazed  Beads:  Harappa  Culture. 

Stone  and  Faience  Beads:  Harappa  Culture. 

Stone  and  Potters’  Beads:  Harappa  Culture. 

Beads  and  other  Objects:  Harappa  Culture. 

Beads  and  Micro-photographs. 

Shells,  Beads,  Drills  and  Brick.  Photographs. 

Beads  and  other  Ornaments:  Jhukar  Culture. 

Miscellaneous  Objects:  Harappa  Culture. 

Miscellaneous  Objects;  Harappa  Culture. 

Miscellaneous  Objects:  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs 
Miscellaneous  Objects;  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs 
Miscellaneous  Objects;  Flarappa  and  Jhukar  Cultures.  Photographs. 
Beads,  Tools  and  Miscellaneous  Objects:  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs 
Skull  Burial:  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs  of  jar  and  Chanhu-daro  skull. 
Fig.  I is  repeated  in  PI.  XVIICg).  Fig.  2 as  in  PI.  XVII(h).  Fig.  3 
is  a larger  picture  of  Fig.  2 on  PI.  XVII(h). 

Skull  from  Chanhu-daro:  Harappa  Culture.  Photographs. 

Skull  from  Chanhu-daro:  Harappa  Culture.  Line  Drawings. 


Chapter  I 


TRENCHES 

Mound  II  was  selected  for  our  most  extensive  operations  but  before  beginning  work 
there  it  was  necessar)^  to  find  a suitable  place  on  which  to  deposit  our  debris.  A fairly 
extensive  area  of  uncultivated  ground  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  mound  was  finally 
chosen,  but  it  had,  of  course,  first  to  be  examined  to  see  what  lay  beneath  before  dumping 
took  place.  With  twenty-one  Brahui  and  fifteen  Sindhi  diggers  a series  of  trenches  was 
accordingly  begun  on  November  2nd,  1935,  and  the  number  of  the  diggers  rapidly  increased 
as  the  work  became  known  in  the  surrounding  villages. 

Mound  II  stood  23.5  feet  above  our  datum  level  and  about  28  feet  above  the  sur- 
rounding plain,  and  it  was  roughly  3,850  square  feet  in  area  (Pi.  III).  Its  northern  and 
eastern  slopes  were  fairly  steep  (Pi.  IX,  a),  but  the  southern  and  western  sides  inclined 
more  gently  (PI.  IX,  b).  It  was  eveiA’where  cut  by  ravines,  which  had  been  gradually  scored 
by  the  waters  of  countless  winter  and  summer  rains.  Like  its  fellows,  Mound  II  was  light 
red  in  colour,  owing  to  the  abundance  of  fine  brick  dust  formed  by  the  action  of  salt  on 
the  masonry  within.  This  gradual  disintegration  must  have  reduced  considerably  the 
height  of  the  mound  in  the  four  thousand  years  or  more  during  which  it  has  lain  derelict. 

It  was  difficult  at  first  to  account  for  the  large  number  of  over-baked  bricks  Iving  on 
the  slopes  of  the  mound.  Their  presence  suggested  that  there  had  been  a brick-kiln  near 
by,  but  it  was  later  disco\'ered  that  their  preservation  was  due  to  the  fact  that  they  had  not 
fallen  to  powder  like  the  bricks  of  more  moderate  hardness. 

Our  first  Trench,  A(o)  in  PI.  Ill,  was  begun  near  the  edge  of  the  cultivated  ground. 
After  running  for  some  distance  north  to  south,  it  was  then  diverted  to  the  southwest. 
In  this  trench  were  discovered  the  foundations  of  a massive  wall  which  in  size  and 
excellence  of  masonry  more  closely  resembled  that  of  Mohenjo-daro  than  any  other  wall 
found  during  the  season’s  work.  After  tracing  this  great  wall  for  about  80  feet,  we  found 
that  its  northern  end  was  broken,  and  here  the  presence  of  crops  prevented  us  from  search- 
ing further.  We  then  followed  the  wall  in  the  opposite  direction  until  it  took  a right- 
angled  turn  to  the  west.  We  were  soon  again  brought  to  a standstill,  this  time  by  a zareba 
of  thorn  bushes  surrounding  the  tomb  of  the  local  saint.  This  massive  wall,  which  is  seen 
in  PI.  X,  c,  d,  measured  5 feet  ^Vi  inches  wide  at  the  northern  end  and  4 feet  9 inches  at 
the  south.  The  bricks  were  laid  as  shown  in  Pi.  X,  c,  and  were  of  two  sizes,  1 0V4  x 5T2  x 2V2 
inches  and  11x5%  x 2V4  inches,  mud  being  used  as  mortar.  The  eastern  side  of  the  wall 
was  smooth  and  level,  but  its  western  face  was  rough,  indicating  that  it  was  not  intended 
to  be  exposed.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  this  is  a description  of  the  foundations; 
the  real  wall  above  no  doubt  had  both  faces  equally  well  finished. 

Projecting  from  the  eastern  face  of  the  wall  at  its  northern  end  was  a footing  at  the 
level  —6.9  feet  (Pi.  X,  d).  This  footing  extended  22  feet  along  the  wall  and  narrowed  in 


2 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


width  from  6 inches  at  the  north  to  3 inches  at  the  south,  suggesting  either  that  at  some 
time  alterations  had  been  made  or  that  the  alignment  of  the  wall  had  been  rectified.  A mass 
of  broken  masonry,  1 2 feet  long  and  1 3!^  inches  thick,  which  had  subsided  badly  in  places, 
lay  against  the  eastern  face  of  the  wall  at  its  eastern  end  (Pis.  VI,  i;  X,  c). 

A slightly  curved  drain  (Pi.  VI,  i),  with  a channel  4ki  inches  wide  by  5I4  inches  deep, 
was  unearthed  near  the  southern  end  of  the  great  wall.^  Above  this  was  a short  section  of 
another  drain,  which  is  shown  in  Pi.  III.  Apart  from  these  two  drains,  no  other  masonry 
was  found  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  wall. 

Its  level  at  the  northern,  and  better  preser\'ed,  end  was  — 4.7  feet,  or  3 feet  below  the 
surface  of  the  ground.  The  southern  face  “ of  the  westward  arm  had  a slight  batter,  but 
the  other  faces  were  vertical. 

It  would  be  idle  to  suggest  the  purpose  of  this  wall  until  further  portions  of  it  have 
been  uncovered.  Its  presence  at  some  distance  from  the  main  mound  definitely  proves  that 
the  city  covered  a much  larger  area  in  the  earlier  stages  of  its  history  than  we  at  first 
suspected,  and  that,  during  this  period,  buildings  were  erected  whose  masonry  rivalled  in 
excellence  that  of  some  of  the  finest  buildings  at  Alohenjo-daro. 

Trench  A(i)  was  cut  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  wall  just  described  in  the  hope  of 
finding  masonry  connecting  with  it,  but  the  few  remains  unearthed  seemed  to  bear  no 
relation  to  it  at  all.  At  loci  2,  3,  4 was  a rectangular  structure,  measuring  3 feet  iVz  inches 
by  I foot  1 1 inches  inside.  Its  walls,  which  averaged  over  4 feet  in  height,  were  one  brick 
thick,  and  there  was  a paved  floor  at  the  level  — 8 feet.  This  structure  was  probably  the 
cess  pit  of  a house  of  which  a corner  was  unearthed  at  locus  5;  the  house  wall  was  2 feet 
thick  and  less  than  i foot  high,  with  its  base  at  the  level  — 5.7  feet. 

Little  of  interest  was  found  in  the  trench.  Close  to  locus  3 the  skeleton  of  an  adult  was 
discovered  2 feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  but  it  was  undoubtedly  of  late  date  and 
nothing  was  associated  with  the  bones. 

Trenches  AC2)  and  A(3)  were  cut  in  a south-westerly  direction  from  the  southern 
end  of  the  great  wall,  and  in  alignment.  Close  to  locus  35  a broken  fragment  of  wall  stood 
some  16  inches  high  with  its  foundations  at  the  level  —4.6  feet.  Just  below  this  lev'el 
was  unearthed  the  pottery  cylinder  (No.  1056)  seen  in  P.  XCI,  49,  and  south-west  at 
locus  36,  a copper  razor  (525,  PI.  LXXIII,  31)  and  two  curry-stones  (1496,  PI.  XCI, 
33,  40)  were  unearthed  at  — 2.7  and  — 3.4  feet  respectively.  West  of  this  wall  and  at  the 
same  level  as  its  base  we  found  the  lower  portion  of  a large  storage  jar.  At  locus  40  in  the 
further  end  of  the  trench  was  another  badly  preserved  wall,  standing  zki  feet  high,  reaching 
to  a little  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  which  at  this  point  began  to  rise  steeply.^  The 
little  pottery  figure  of  a dove  (757),  seen  in  Pi.  LVII,  12,  came  from  just  in  front  of  this 
wall  at  the  same  level  as  its  foundations. 

A second  line  of  trenches  was  then  dug  parallel  with,  and  east  of,  those  already 

^ Its  foundations  were  8.5  ft.  below  datum. 

2 At  this  point  the  wall  stood  over  5 ft.  high  with  foundations  at  — 8.1  ft.  The  base  was  remark- 
ably level  throughout  its  length. 

® The  base  of  this  wall  was  7.7  ft.  below  datum. 


TRENCHES 


3 


described,  and  one  [6(4)]  at  right  angles.  In  Trenches  B(i),  6(2),  and  B(4)  only  a 
few  fragments  of  very  rough  masonry  were  revealed,  i.  e.,  between  loci  19  and  20.  In 
Trench  B(3)  a thin  wall  was  uncovered  north-east  of  locus  22,  with  its  foundations  at 
— 3.9  feet.  A little  south-west  of  this  last  wall  were  unearthed  the  fragments  of  the  finely 
painted  storage  jar  (503^  seen  in  PI.  XXXV,  i,  at  the  level  — 6.5  feet.  In  the  vicinity  of 
locus  22  in  Trench  B(3)  a copper  awl  C197,  PI.  LXXII,  9),  a little  bronze  jar  (172,  Pi. 
LXXIII,  34),  and  some  painted  sherds  (3922,  PI.  XXXII,  I,  I a)  were  found  at  levels 
between  — 4.  3 and  — 10.3  feet. 

Trench  BCj),  which  approached  the  lower  slopes  of  Mound  II,  proved  more  inter- 
esting. At  locus  59  there  were  the  remains  of  a thick  wall  about  2 feet  high,  with  founda- 
tions at  the  level  -f  0.2  feet.  South  of  this  were  other,  thinner,  walls  in  a very  badly 
weathered  condition.*  Below  the  wall  at  59  was  a small  length  of  covered-in  drain  with  a 
recess,  18  inches  square,  on  its  south-eastern  side  (PI.  VI,  2),  and  alongside  this  a collection 
of  pottery  vessels  (995-997,  PI.  XXVIII,  42-44)  was  found  at  the  level  — 2.0  feet.  An 
opening  in  this  recess,  10  inches  high  by  7 inches  wide,  served  as  an  outlet  for  the  drain. 
At  locus  55  the  remains  of  a large  storage  jar  (No.  506)  were  unearthed  together  with  a 
copper  razor  (496,  Pi.  LXXIII,  28),  the  frame  of  a model  cart  (3708,  Pi.  LVIII,  6),  a clay 
food-stand  (3704,  Pi.  XXV,  20),  and  a pottery  cone  (3707,  Pi.  LX,  23),  all  between  —0.5 
and  —2.2  feet.  A few  bricks  round  the  base  of  the  storage  jar  had  probably  formed 
part  of  a pavement  at  the  level  — 0.3  feet.  WTst  of  the  jar,  but  at  lower  level,  the  drainage 
system  illustrated  in  PI.  XI,  d was  unearthed.  The  upper  drain  was  an  open  channel,  6 
inches  wide  by  5 inches  deep,  made  of  bricks  1 1 x 5 .\  2E2  inches  in  size.’'  About  2 feet 
below  again  was  a drain  of  quite  another  type  consisting  of  tapered  pottery  segments 
(PL  VI,  4)  laid  with  a considerable  slope  towards  the  south-east,  the  fall  being  i foot  in 
the  total  length  of  1 1 feet.® 

Other  interesting  structures  (illustrated  in  Pi.  XI,  b)  in  this  trench  lay  between  loci 
41  and  56.  The  inside  diameter  of  the  round  brick  bin,  which  stood  18  inches  high  and 
may  have  been  used  for  grain,  was  2 feet  iVi  inches,'  and  close  by  was  a large  storage  jar 
which  had,  however,  been  removed  for  safety  before  the  photograph  was  taken.  South  of 
the  jar  was  a cess  pit,  20  inches  square  and  29  inches  deep,  with  a paved  floor.®  An  opening 
near  the  top  of  the  north-western  side  of  the  cess  pit  showed  that  a drain  with  a channel 
5 inches  wide  and  3 inches  deep  had  formerly  emptied  into  it.  South  of  this  pit  was  a 
pavement  at  the  level  — 0.8  feet,  roughly  constructed  of  broken  brick,  which  had  been 
drained  by  a water-channel,  3 inches  wide  and  4V2  inches  deep.  Only  9 feet  of  this  drain 
remained,  with  a drop  of  some  i o inches  in  that  length.® 

Locus  43  to  the  north-west  produced  a painted  bowl  (3702,  PI.  XXVII,  59)  at  the 

Their  foundation  levels  were  between  -j-  i .2  and  — 0.2  ft. 

^ The  level  of  its  floor  was  — 1.7  ft. 

® Its  northern  end  was  at  the  level  — 3.7  ft. 

^ The  level  of  its  highest  portion  was  — 1.9  ft. 

® The  surface  of  this  was  1.8  ft.  below  datum. 

®The  eastern  end  of  this  drain  was  5 in.  below  the  pavement. 


4 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


depth  of  — 5.9  feet  and  from  lower  still  came  the  clay  figure  of  an  antelope  (3852,  PI.  LV, 
13)  at  — 10.2  feet. 

The  round  brick  construction  was  built  of  slightly  curved  bricks,  4M  inches  wide  by 
3 inches  thick,  and  and  iol4  inches  in  length  on  inner  and  outer  sides  respectively. 
These  bricks  must  have  been  made  for  special  purposes,  such  as  the  building  of  bins  and 
the  lining  of  wells,  but  their  shape  was  hardly  suited  to  the  small  radius  of  this  particular 
structure.  Apparently  this  is  the  first  known  occurrence  of  curved  bricks.  They  have  not 
been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  nor  have  I heard  of  any  from  Harappa.  The  wells  at  both 
these  sites  were  lined  with  wedge-shaped  bricks,  but  ordinary  bricks  were  also  made  to 
serve  this  particular  purpose. 

A curious  feature  was  the  amount  of  stone  that  had  been  mixed  with  this  brickwork; 
no  less  than  six  unfinished  saddle-querns  of  var^'ing  sizes  were  found  in  it.  One  of  these  is 
clearly  discernable  in  the  photograph  in  PI.  XI,  b. 

After  the  remo\'al  of  the  bin  and  cess  pit,  the  two  drains  shown  in  PI.  VI,  5 were  found 
below.  Both  were  5 inches  wide  by  3 inches  deep,  but  their  remains  were  too  scanty  to 
show  the  direction  of  the  flow.^° 

South-west  of  the  pa\'ement  at  locus  56,  came  the  trial  inscription  in  steatite  (518, 
PI.  LI,  4),  a pottery  kohl-jar  (852,  Pi.  XXVII,  71),  two  copper  awls  (636,  637,  PI.  LXXII, 
7,10),  a pottery  figurine  (621,  PI.  LIII,  10),  and  an  unfinished  seal  (594,  PI.  LI,  3)  at 
levels  ranging  from  + 0.8  to  — 5.7  feet. 

Trench  B(5)  was  e.xcavated  to  a depth  of  — 10.7  feet  at  its  south-western  end,“  but 
nothing  further  was  found  in  the  way  of  masonry  save  a few  patches  of  sun-dried  brick 
whose  shape  and  size  it  was  impossible  to  determine.  With  some  difficulty  we  extracted 
a few  whole  bricks  which  proved  to  be  of  two  sizes:  12L2  x 5%  x inches  and  13I4  x 
x 4 inches  respectively.  It  is  probable  that  these  bricks  had  formed  part  of  one  of  the 
platforms  on  which  houses  had  been  raised  above  flood  level. 

In  Trench  C(i)  there  was  no  trace  of  any  building,  though  it  was  carried  to  an 
average  depth  of  6.3  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  plain.  At  the  north-eastern  end  a skeleton 
of  late  date  was  found  at  the  level  — 5.5  feet;  it  faced  south-east  and  lay  in  an  extended 
position  on  its  back  with  the  arms  close  to  the  sides.  No  objects  were  associated  with 
the  body. 

A considerable  amount  of  masonix’  was  unearthed  in  Trenches  CC2)  and  0(3).  A 
blocked-up  doorway,  2 feet  8 inches  wide,  in  a section  of  wall  at  the  north-western  end  of 
Trench  0(3),  had  a well  preserved  sill  at  the  level  5.5  feet  below  datum. The  jambs 
of  this  doorway  averaged  2 feet  4 inches  in  height,  with  their  foundations  at  — 6.4  feet. 
South-east  of  this  wall  a little  square  patch  of  brickwork  may  once  have  formed  part  of  a 
pavement,''^  one  brick  thick,  although,  from  its  angle,  it  clearly  had  no  connection  with  a 

Their  average  le\'el  was  4.3  ft.  below  datum. 

The  surface  levels  were  4-  3-4  ft-  here  and  -)-  0.3  ft.  at  the  north-western  end  of  the  trench. 

The  highest  part  of  this  unburnt  brick-work  was  8 ft.  below  datum. 

“ The  thickness  of  the  wall  was  i foot  9^2  inches,  and  the  bricks  were  10.9  x 5 x 2.25  ins.  in  size. 

Level  — 5.5  ft. 


TRENCHES 


very  much  larger  area  at  locus  31.  Here  a piece  of  pav'ement,  roughly  4 feet  long  by  3 
feet  wide,  was  built  of  two  courses  of  bricks  laid  on  their  flats/“ 

The  short  wall  at  the  end  of  this  floor  stood  slightly  over  i foot  in  height,  with  its 
foundations  7.6  feet  below  datum. 

At  locus  26,  to  the  east,  we  came  upon  masonry  which  must  have  formed  part  of  an 
important  building.  A wall,  4 feet  5 inches  wide,  built  of  bricks  ii  x j^lix  2 inches  in 
size,  still  stood  about  4 feet  6 inches  high.  A little  to  the  north  of  it  and  lexel  with  its 
upper  portion  was  another  fragment  of  wall  at  a different  angle.  This  last,  which  was 
also  of  quite  respectable  thickness  (4  feet),  stood  only  four  courses  high.^®  When  it  was 
removed,  immediately  below  it  we  came  upon  another  wall  (PI.  VI,  3)  abutting  on,  though 
not  bonded  with,  the  lower  part  of  the  4 feet  6 inches  high  wall  at  right  angles  to  it,  thus 
forming  the  corner  of  a room  or,  more  probably,  a courtyard,  for  the  second  wall  was  sup- 
ported by  a buttress,  measuring  2 feet  wide  by  1 1 inches  thick.”  A large  pottery  bowl 
(825,  PI.  XXVII,  63)  and  a clay  whistle  (467,  PI.  LIX,  5)  came  from  locus  26  at  the  levels 
— 5.0  and  — 1 2. 1 ft.  respectively.  The  food-stand  dish  (3968)  illustrated  in  PI.  XXVII,  36 
was  unearthed  in  locus  36,  where  it  was  found  lying  at  the  depth  of  — 5.6  feet. 

Trench  D(i)  was  cut  close  beside  Trench  6(3),  the  space  between  them  being  cut 
away  later  to  expose  fully  the  long,  well-built  drain  crossing  the  north-eastern  end  of  the 
first  mentioned  trench.  This  drain,  which  we  picked  up  again  when  excavating  Trench 
J(i),  had  a channel  4%  inches  wide  by  3 inches  deep,  and  its  sides  were  built  of  bricks 
laid  on  their  longer  edges. At  its  north-western  end  it  was  at  the  level  — 2.8  feet,  and 
it  sloped  veiy  gradually  some  27  feet  to  the  south-east.  Below  this  drain,  at  —8.1  feet,  was 
found  the  base  of  a large  painted  storage  jar  with  an  unusual  pzpaMeaf  design  (662,  Pis. 

XXXVI,  37,  XXXVII,  20).^® 

At  locus  38  in  Trench  E(  i ),  considerably  further  west,  was  a badly  damaged  pavement 
which  had  originally  been  surrounded  by  walls,  but  only  the  north-western  portion  of  the 
walls  remained  and  the  masonry  was  poor  (PI.  XI,  c).  This  floor,  which  is  shown  as  square 
in  the  plan,  was  5 feet  6 inches  in  width,  but  its  original  length  could  only  be  guessed  at, 
because  of  denudation.  It  was  built  of  two  courses  of  bricks  laid  on  their  flats  with  the 
surface  level  of  the  pavement  at  — 2.8  feet.  The  front  wall  of  this  little  building  faced 
north-west  and  had  a slight  batter.  In  it  was  a water-chute,  which  was  qVi  inches  in  width 
at  the  base  and  narrowed  to  iVi  inches  at  the  top.  Immediately  below  this  chute  was  a large 
jar  whose  rim  was  2.9  feet  below  datum. The  bricks  used  for  both  wall  and  pavement 
were  9%  x 5I4  x 2I4  inches.  A foot  below  the  north-western  corner  of  the  pavement  was 
a second  large  jar  (No.  1002)  at  the  level  — 6.2  feet  and  close  to  this  lay  the  pottery  cone 

The  top  of  this  floor  was  at  — 6.1  ft. 

Its  foundation  level  was  — 7.6  ft. 

The  bases  of  these  two  walls  averaged  — 13.7  ft. 

The  bricks  were  9.4  x 4.4  x 2.5  ins.  in  size. 

” The  surface  levels  of  this  trench  were:  —0.5  ft.  at  the  north-western  and  -p  0.9  ft.  at  the 
south-eastern  end. 

The  highest  part  of  the  wall  here  was  2 ft.  above  this  level. 


6 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(3933)  seen  in  PI.  LX,  33  and  the  clay  figurine  (3585)  illustrated  in  Pl.LIII,  4.  The 
painted  jar  (3654)  in  PI.  XXVIII,  59  was  recovered  from  locus  32,  where  it  lay  at  2.3  feet 
below  datum.  Locus  33  to  the  west  produced  a potter)^  ring  (1278,  Pi.  LXXXIX,  8)  at 
— 4.9  feet  and  the  little  kohl-jar  (499)  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXVII,  76.  The  seal  C926)  in 
PI.  LI,  1 8 came  from  locus  34,  level  — 7.  i feet. 

With  the  exception  of  a third  storage  jar  (No.  233)  in  the  north-western  corner, 
nothing  else  in  the  way  of  walling  was  discovered  in  Trench  ECi),  which  was  carried  to 
an  average  depth  of  — 9.7  feet. 

Trench  P(i)  was  at  first  a separate  pit,  but  the  complex  series  of  pavements  and 
drainage  channels  found  here  necessitated  widening  it  to  meet  the  trenches  on  either  side. 
The  structures  unearthed  in  the  higher  levels  of  this  pit  are  shown  in  the  general  plan 
in  Pi.  Ill  and  also  in  Pi.  XI,  e,  f.  The  upper  channel  in  Pl.XI,  f drained  a pavement  at 
the  level  — 1.6  feet,''  which  was  in  a very  bad  state  of  presentation  and  was  removed  to 
reveal  a much  better  preserved  floor  below.  The  water  from  the  upper  pavement  ran  into 
a large  storage  jar,“  which  when  full  overflowed  into  the  drain. 

The  sides  of  the  drain  were  built  of  bricks  set  on  their  longer  edges  and  the  channel 
was  3 inches  in  width  by  inches  deep.  This  was  traced  for  about  i^Vz  feet  towards 
the  north,  in  which  distance  there  was  a drop  of  about  14  inches.  It  was  then  joined  by 
another  drain  at  right  angles  to  it,  of  which  about  12  feet  remained  in  fairly  good  condition. 

The  lower,  better  preserved  pav'ement  in  the  foreground  of  Pi.  XI,  e and  in  the  distance 
in  Pi.  XI,  f was  2.  i feet  below  datum  level.  It  was  drained  by  a poorly  constructed  channel 
which  we  traced  for  about  24  feet  northwards  (PI.  VI,  8),  where  it  was  a foot  below  the 
level  of  the  pavement. 

Below  again,  we  came  upon  a third  badly  denuded  floor  and  water-channel,  a plan  of 
which  appears  in  PI.  VI,  6 and  a photograph  in  Pl.XI,f  (the  lower  drain  on  the  left-hand 
side).  It  was  impossible  to  discover  the  original  dimensions  of  this  last  pavement,  but  the 
few  bricks  that  remained  were  3.4  feet  below  datum  level.  The  channel  also  ran  almost 
due  north.  About  23  feet  of  it  were  cleared  and  at  the  broken  northern  end  we  found  a 
large  jar  into  which  the  water  ran  before  overflowing  into  another  drain. This  last 
channel  had  formed  part  of  a fourth  system  lying  below  the  other  three  (PI.  VI,  7),  with 
a much  better  preserved  pavement  than  any  of  them.'^  Here  the  original  skirting  of  bricks 
set  on  edge  round  the  pavement  and  projecting  above  it  for  3H  inches  was  complete  on  its 
eastern  side  and  partly  preserved  along  its  northern  and  southern  ends.  A photograph  of 
the  drain  is  seen  in  PI.  X,  a,  and  the  large  jar  is  the  one  mentioned  in  connection  with 
the  third  system  of  drainage  immediately  above.  This  fourth  channel  ran  from  north-west 
to  south-east,  but  disappeared  after  about  22  feet  of  it  had  been  cleared.  It  was  4 inches 

At  the  level  — 2.4  ft. 

--  This  pavement  must  not  be  confused  with  the  lower  paving  in  the  foreground  of  the 
photograph. 

Just  seen  in  PI.  XI,  f. 

There  was  a drop  of  6 ins.  to  this  jar  from  pavement  level. 

At  the  level  4.1  ft.  below  datum. 


TRENCHES 


7 


wide  by  2V2  inches  deep  and,  unlike  those  above,  its  sides  were  built  of  bricks  laid  on 
their  flats."® 

It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  length  of  the  periods  marked  bv  these  four  entirely 
separate  drainage  arrangements,  but  the  fact  that  a depth  of  only  2 feet  6 inches  lav  between 
the  uppermost  paving  and  the  lowest  showed  that  no  period  could  have  been  of  great 
duration.  It  must  be  remembered  that  these  floors  with  their  drains  were  situated  on  the 
lower  slopes  of  Mound  II,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  natural  rise  in  level  was  greater  there 
than  it  was  higher  up,  for  much  material  must  have  been  washed  down  the  mound  even 
during  the  time  when  it  was  covered  with  houses."'  Wflien  Mound  II  has  been  exca\  ated  to 
the  level  of  these  trenches,  we  shall  perhaps  be  able  to  sort  out  this  iumble  and  link  them 
up  with  the  occupation  levels  we  shall  discover  in  the  mound  itself. 

Locus  42  in  Trench  E(i)  produced  an  inscribed  sherd  (4789,  PI.  XXXVIII,  5),  a 
foodstand  (4854,  Pi.  XXV,  29),  and  the  pottery  group  (866,  a-0  seen  in  Pl.XXXIII, 
24-29,  the  last  coming  from  as  low  as  — 10.5  feet.  Mention  may  also  be  made  of  sc\  cral 
objects  found  in  locus  65  in  Trench  P(2).  These  comprise  a group  ol  pchblc-wcights 
(No.  1095),  one  of  which  is  shown  in  Pi.  XCI,  26,  two  pottery  rattles  (1074,  Pi.  LEX,  9, 
10),  and  a potter)’  figure  of  a dog  (883,  PI.  LVI,  6),  at  depths  ranging  from  —3.4  feet 
to  — 7.2  feet. 

At  locus  49  in  Trench  G(i)  a corner  of  a wall  was  discovered.  This  was  2 feet 

3 inches  broad  at  the  thickest  part,  but  only  three  courses  of  brick  remained  and  there  was 
nothing  else  in  the  vicinity  save  the  base  of  a large  storage  jar,'®  a kohl-jar  (1875,  PI. 
XXVII,  81),  and  a clay  cylinder  (i  140,  Pi.  XCI,  48),  the  two  last  being  at  — i .0  and  — 2.9 
feet  respectively.  Two  pebble-weights  (881,  1072,  PI.  XCI,  23,  24)  and  a pottery  jnodel 
of  a dove  (1402,  Pi.  LVII,  6)  were  taken  from  locus  47  in  the  north-eastern  corner  of  this 
trench  at  the  levels  —-5.6  and  —6.1  feet.  Some  distance  to  the  south-west,  however,  well 
preserved  brickwork  was  unearthed  at  loci  58  and  75.  This  proved  to  be  a long,  thin  wall 
which  turned  eastwards  at  one  end.  This  wall,  which  was  28  feet  in  length  and  i foot 
5 inches  in  thickness,  was  peculiarly  constructed— four  courses  of  burnt  brick  were  inter- 
spaced with  courses  of  sun-dried  brick,  both  kinds  of  bricks  being  1 1 x 5V2  x 21 2 inches  in 
size.'®  The  height  of  the  wall  was  i foot  8 inches  and  it  rested  on  debris  at  the  level 
+ 0.6  feet. 

On  the  south-western  side  of  this  wall  was  a brick-lined  pit  with  a paved  floor,  6 feet 

4 inches  long  by  2 feet  7 inches  wide.  Its  eastern  end  was  the  best  preserved,  and  here  the 
top  was  2.1  feet  above  datum,  the  floor  being  a little  over  2 feet  lower.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
for  what  purpose  this  pit  was  used.  It  seems  much  too  large  to  be  a soak-away  or  cess  pit; 
moreover,  there  were  no  openings  for  drains  in  its  walls,  which  were  one  brick  thick  and 
not  absolutely  vertical.®® 

The  north-western  end  of  this  drain  was  6 ins.  below  the  level  of  the  pavement. 

The  length  of  the  interval  between  the  construction  of  the  upper  and  lower  systems  of  drainage 
in  this  trench,  I should  put  at  not  more  than  hfty  years. 

--  .V  the  same  level  as  the  base  of  the  wall  which  was  2.1  ft.  above  datum. 

Verv  similar  masonry  was  found  in  several  parts  of  Mohenjo-daro : F.  E.  M.,  p.  164,  pi.  XX. 

"“The  bricks  used  in  its  construction  w’ere  i ol4  x 5W  .x  214  ins.  in  size. 


8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


The  surface  level  at  the  north-western  end  of  Trench  G(i)  was  — 0.6  feet,  and  at 
the  south-eastern  end  + 4.6  feet;  it  was  excavated  to  an  average  depth  of  8 feet. 

The  most  westerly  of  our  trenches  [H(i)l  presented  one  solitary  item  of  interest, 
an  isolated  pipe  drain  running  from  north-west  to  south-east,  where  it  ended  in  a pottery 
gutter,  one  end  of  which  was  inserted  into  the  pipe  and  the  other  closed  by  a pottery  sherd 
(Pl.X,  b).  As  the  photograph  shows,  this  drain  was  constructed  of  tapered  pottery  seg- 
ments, two  of  which  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXXXVIII,  18  andXC,  30,  and  the  gutter  (1545) 
in  PI.  XCI,  1 9.  Eight  portions  of  the  drain  remained,  but  the  pavement  or  other  masonry 
once  associated  with  it  had  been  removed  in  ancient  times. A little  north-east  of  this 
drain,  a stone  door-socket(?)  (1308,  PI.  XCII,  22),  a stone  mace-head  (3608,  Pi.  LXXXIX, 
25),  and  a pottery  gamesman  (3871,  Pi.  LX,  6)  were  found  in  locus  51,  all  except  the  first 
being  about  8 feet  below  datum. 

The  surface  level  of  this  trench  was  — 0.0  feet  at  the  north-western  end  and  at  the 
south-west  5.8  feet. 

Trench  ICi),  towards  the  eastern  end  of  the  series,  contained  no  masonry  of  any  kind 
save  only  a short  stretch  of  roughly  built  drain  at  locus  62.  The  channel  of  this  was  4 
inches  wide  by  4%  inches  deep,  and  flowed  to  the  north-east,  the  average  level  of  its  bed 
being  -h  0.8  feet.^"  This  trench  was  dug  to  the  level  of  — 9.0  feet,  its  surface  levels  at 
north-east  and  south-west  respectively  being  — 1.5  and  + 2.4  feet.  Locus  61  on  the  north- 
eastern edge  produced  the  handled  cup  (670,  Pi.  XXV,  55)  at  —6.5  feet. 

At  the  north-eastern  end  of  Trench  J(i),  immediately  west  of  Trench  1(0,  quite  a 
thick  wall  was  encountered,  but  only  a little  over  12  feet  of  it  remained.  Some  3 feet  3 
inches  in  thickness,  it  stood  only  a foot  high,  as  the  greater  part  of  it  had  been  removed 
anciently  by  quarriers  for  bricks.®*  This  trench  also  contained  the  broken  south-eastern 
end  of  the  brick  drain  mentioned  in  the  description  of  the  adjoining  Trench  D(i).  At 
locus  79  the  corner  of  another  wall  was  uncovered.  This  stood  only  i foot  4 inches  high,®* 
and  though  not  quite  so  thick  may  once  have  formed  part  of  the  same  building  as  the 
other  wall  found  in  this  trench.  Close  to  here  the  tu'o  animal  figures  (952,  948,  Pis.  LV, 
10,  LVII,  0 and  a stone  palette  (1122,  PI.  XCI,  43)  were  recovered  at  fairly  high  levels. 
Locus  73  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  this  trench  contained  a seal  (950,  PI.  LII,  9)  at 
— o.i  feet  and  the  interesting  painted  sherd  (1558)  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIII,  15  at  —3.4 
feet.  Trench  J(i)  was  cut  to  a depth  of  9 feet  below  datum;  its  surface  levels  at  the 
north-east  and  south-west  being  — 1.5  and  + 5.9  feet  respectively. 

No  masonry  was  discovered  in  the  most  easterly  of  the  series  of  trenches,  K(i), 
though  it  was  carried  down  to  the  level  of  — 8.5  feet.  The  pottery  dove  (889,  Pi.  LVII,  8) 
and  a clay  pellet  (1334,  PI.  LIX,  26)  were  among  some  unimportant  articles  cleared  in  the 
vicinity  of  locus  77.  The  ground  level  here  was  — 1.2  feet  at  the  north-eastern  and  -f  2.0 
feet  at  the  south-western  end. 

The  gutter  at  the  end  of  the  pipe  was  10.8  ft.  below  datum;  the  trench  was  carried  down  a 
foot  deeper  but  nothing  else  was  found. 

The  bricks  were  9%  x 4V2  x zht  ins.  in  size. 

Its  top  was  2.2  ft.  below  datum. 

°^Its  broken  top  was  1.5  ft.  below  datum. 


TRENCHES 


9 


I have  already  mentioned  that  none  of  the  structures  found  in  these  trenches  can  be 
definitely  correlated  at  present  with  any  that  have  been  discovered  in  the  main  part  of 
Adound  II.  They  lie  at  a considerably  lower  level  than  any  of  the  buildings  exposed  on  that 
mound  and,  until  we  have  reached  the  trench  levels  in  our  systematic  paring  of  the  mound, 
it  would  be  unsafe  to  assign  them  to  any  particular  occupation  level.  The  work  done  in 
these  trenches  has,  however,  produced  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  there  are  at  least 
three  or  four  occupation  strata  lying  below  the  buildings  cleared  by  our  extensive  opera- 
tions on  the  mound  itself.  At  the  same  time,  every  object  found  in  the  trenches  was 
already  familiar  through  the  work  done  at  Alohenjo-daro  and  Harappa.  As  we  had  the 
same  experience  in  the  deep  “ Cutting  ” that  was  made  later  in  the  season  on  the  other 
side  of  Alound  II,  there  seems  no  hope  of  finding  at  Chanhu-daro  a culture  of  earlier  date 
than  that  which  we  have  named  the  “ Harappa  Culture.”  ““  Any  vestiges  that  there  may 
be  of  the  “ Amri  Culture  ” must  now  lie  too  far  below  the  present  water-level  in  the  soil 
to  be  attainable. 

Below  is  a list  of  some  more  interesting  antiquities  found  in  these  trenches: 

Trench  A 

Section  ( i ) 

No.  135,  PI.  XCII,  2.  Level:  —5.5  ft.  Drill-head. 

No.  868,  PI.  XXIX,  9.  Level;  — 5.6  ft.  Pottery  tumbler. 

Section  (2) 

No.  1023,  PI.  XXVII,  91.  Level:  —8.6  ft.  Kohl-jar. 

Section  (3) 

No.  1008,  Pis.  LIX,  7;  LXI,  I.  Level:  — 3.6  ft.  Pottery  rattle. 

No.  998,  PI.  XCI,  6.  Level:  —3.7ft.  Pottery  table. 

No.  1000,  PI.  LVIII,  19.  Level:  —3.8  ft.  Model  cart-frame. 

No.  1003,  PI.  XXXIX,  21.  Level:  —3.8  ft.  Pottery  feeding-cup. 

No.  1062,  PI.  LVIII,  24.  Level :— 4.2  ft.  Model  cart-wheel. 

No.  1004,  PI.  XXXIX,  27.  Level:  —4.4  ft.  Insect  cage. 

No.  3804,  PI.  LVII,  7.  Level:  — 7.8  ft.  Pottery  dove. 

Section  (4) 

No.  1216,  PI.  XXXVI,  16.  Locus  69.  Level:  —0.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1219,  PI.  LIX,  4.  Locus  67.  Level:  —0.7  ft.  Pottery  marble. 

No.  1269,  PI.  LI,  21.  Level:  —4.1ft.  Seal. 

No.  181 1,  PI.  XXV,  23.  Locus  69.  Level;  — 4.9  ft.  Footed  bowl. 

No.  1126,  Pis.  LXXXIX,  23;  XCIII,  35.  Locus  69.  Level:  - 5.3  ft.  Mace-head. 

No.  1013,  PI.  LIX,  I.  Locus  67.  Level:  —6.1  ft.  Pottery  animal. 

No.  3795,  PI.  LX,  21.  Locus  67.  Level:  —6.1  ft.  Pottery  cone. 

No.  3787,  PI.  XXV,  59.  Locus  69.  Level:  -7.9  ft.  Handled  cup. 

Trench  B 

Section  (i) 

No.  108,  PI.  LXXII,  24.  Level:  - 2.7  ft.  Arrow-head. 

No.  too,  PI.  XXXIV,  2.  Level:  -4.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  773,  PI.  LIX,  38.  Level:  -4.7  ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 

” Originally  termed  ''  Indus  Valley  Culture.” 


lO 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  87,  PI.  XCI,  I.  Level:  —4.7  ft.  Pottery  stand. 

No.  95,  PI.  LIX,  22.  Level:  —5.1ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 

No.  90,  PL  XXVI,  21.  Level:  — 5.2  ft.  Pottery  jar-cover. 

No.  89,  PI.  XXVI,  19.  Level:  — 6.1  ft.  Pottery  jar-cov'er. 

Section  (2) 

No.  188,  PI.  XCIL  19.  Locus  22.  Level:  —5.3  ft.  Stone  pestle. 

No.  565,  PI.  XXVI,  61.  Level:  — 10. i ft.  Corrugated  pottery  sherd. 

Section  (3) 

No.  9 1 8,  PI.  XCIIL  24.  Level : — 4.2  ft.  Flint  flake. 

No.  503,  PI.  XXXV,  I.  Level:  — 6.5  ft.  Storage  jar. 

No.  533,  PI.  LV,  6.  Level:  —7.7  ft.  Pottery  horn  of  animal. 

No.  544,  PI.  XXXVII,  12.  Level:  —7.7ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  564,  PI.  XXXVIII,  8.  Level:  — 7.7  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

Section  (5) 

No.  275,  PI.  LX,  12.  Level:  + 0.3  ft.  Ivory  die. 

No.  488,  PI.  LXXIII,  6.  Locus  44.  Level:  — 0.7  ft.  Fish-hook. 

No.  487,  PI.  LV,  2.  Level:  —0.7ft.  Pottery  model  of  bull. 

No.  3706,  PI.  LIII,  9.  Level:  —1.7ft.  Pottery  figurine. 

No.  968,  PI.  XC.  29.  Level:  —2.7  ft.  Pottery  bangle. 

No.  804,  PI.  XCIII,  26.  Level:  —3.2  ft.  Flint  flake. 

No.  3878,  PI.  XXXIII,  12.  Level:  -3.3ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  364,  PI.  LXXIII,  13.  Level:  —3.9  ft.  Arrow-head. 

No.  806,  PI.  LX,  22.  Level:  —3.9  ft.  Pottery  cone. 

No.  783,  PI.  LIX,  28.  Level:  —4.4  ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 

No.  784,  PI.  LIX,  25.  Level : — 4.4  ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 

No.  967,  PI.  XC,  28.  Level:  —4.9  ft.  Pottery  bangle. 

No.  337,  PI.  LV,  3.  Level:  — 4.2  ft.  Animal  figure. 

No,  3702,  PI.  XXIII,  2.  Level:  —5.9  ft.  Painted  jai. 

No.  835,  Pis.  LXXL  7;  LXXVI,  8.  Locus  63.  Level:  —6.0  ft.  Copper  knife. 
No.  3797,  PI.  XXXIII,  2.  Locus 43.  Level:  —6.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3802,  PI.  LVIII,  3.  Locus  44.  Level:  — 10.2  ft.  Pottery  cart-wheel. 

Trench  C 
Section  (2) 

No.  355,  PI.  XCI,  13.  Level:  — 2.5  ft.  Paste  cylinder. 

No.  203,  PI.  XXV,  54.  Level:  —5.0  ft.  Handled  cup. 

Section  (3) 

No.  470,  PI.  XXV,  21.  Level:  — 5.8  ft.  Stem  and  base  of  food-stand. 

No.  465,  PI.  LIV,  7.  Level:  —7.9  ft.  Pottery  figurine. 

No.  3568,  PI.  LVIII,  8.  Level:  — 7.9  ft.  Pottery  model  bull. 

Trench  D 
Section  ( i ) 

No.  3907,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  5.  Level : — 0.7  ft.  Pottery  button. 

No.  339,  PI.  LXX,  3.  Level:  —1.9  ft.  Chisel. 

No.  431,  PI.  XXV,  8.  Level:  —2.0  ft.  Food-stand. 

No.  1157,  PI.  LX,  29.  Level:  — 2.1  ft.  Pottery  cone. 

No.  713,  PI.  XXXVI,  20.  Level:  —2.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  714,  PI.  XCI,  39.  Level:  —2.6  ft.  Hone. 

No.  1039,  PL  XCI,  21.  Level:  —8.1ft.  Paste  plaque. 


TRENCHES 


1 1 


No.  723,  PI.  LVIII,  lo.  Level:  —4.1ft.  Pottery  cart-frame. 

No.  1069,  PI- XXXIII,  I . Level:  —6.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3381,  PI.  XXXVI,  12.  Level:  —7.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

Trench  E 

No.  1276,  PI.  LVII,  9.  Level:  —3.2  ft.  Pottery  dove. 

No.  3588,  PI.  XCII,  21.  Level:  — 4.8  ft.  Pottery  plaque. 

No.  926,  PI.  LI,  i8.  Locus  34,  Level:  — 7.1  ft.  Seal. 

Trench  F 
Section  (i) 

No.  I ICO,  PI.  XC,  27.  Level:  —3.4  ft.  Pottery  bangle. 

No.  3619,  PI.  LIV,  12.  Level:  —4.1ft.  Pottery  figurine. 

No.  3621,  PI.  XXXIIL  3.  Level:  —4.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1031,  PI.  XCIII,  25.  Level:  —5.1ft.  Flint  flake. 

Section  (2) 

No.  3720,  PL  XXXVII.  28.  Level:  — 3.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3721,  PI.  LXXXIX,  27.  Level:  —3.6  ft.  Stone  rubber. 

No.  3714,  PI.  LVIII,  17.  Level:  —3.6  ft.  Model  animal. 

No.  3668,  PI.  XXXVI,  25,  41.  Level:  —4.2  ft.  Painted  sherds. 

No.  1469,  PI.  XXXIV,  I . Level:  —4.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1467,  PI.  XXXIIL  1 1 . Level:  —4.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3754,  Pis.  XXIII,  5;  XXXVII,  40.  Locus  66.  Level:  —6.6ft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  3855,  PI.  XXVI,  9.  Locus  64,  Level:  —8.9  ft.  Jar-stand. 

Trench  G 

No.  1348,  PI.  LXX,  22.  Level:  — 2.3  ft.  Copper  knife. 

No.  1 139,  PI.  XCL  47.  Level:  —2.6  ft.  Pottery  cylinder. 

No.  592,  PI.  LXX,  21.  Le\  el:  —3.1ft.  Copper  knife. 

No.  3660,  PL  LXXXIX,  29.  Level:  — 3.8  ft.  Unfinished  mace-head. 

No.  1687,  PL  XC,  40.  Level:  —4.2ft.  Faience  bangle. 

No.  882,  PL  LVI,  5-  Locus  50.  Level:  —5.3ft.  Animal  figure. 

Trench  H 

No.  3865,  PL  XC,  39.  Locus  53.  Level:  —1.7  ft.  Faience  bangle. 

No.  1206,  PL  LVIII,  7-  Locus  52.  Level:  —4.1ft.  Pottery  model  bull. 

No.  3724,  PL  LIX,  12.  Level:  —7.6  ft.  Pottery  marble. 

Trench  1 

No.  1 178,  PL  LX,  25.  Level:  —3.2  ft.  Pottery  cone. 

No.  3592,  PL  XXX,  I.  Level:  —5.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

Trench  J 

No.  1301,  PL  XXVII,  74-  Locus  71.  Level:  —5.9  ft.  Painted  kohl-jar. 

No.  1354,  PL  LX,  39.  Locus  73.  Level:  —7.8  ft.  Pottery  cone. 

Trench  K 

No.  3745,  PL  XXXIL  9.  Level:  —4.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3667,  PL  XXXVI,  21.  Level:  — 4.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3743,  PL  LV,  I.  Level:  —4.4  ft.  Pottery  animal’s  head. 


Chapter  II 


THE  CUTTING 

On  February  i8th,  1936,  a deep  exploratory  cutting  was  commenced  close  to  and 
partly  embracing  the  south-western  slopes  of  Mound  II,  its  object  being  to  examine  the 
remains  of  any  earlier  cultures  that  might  lie  below  the  two  Harappa  strata,  of  which 
Mound  II  was  principally  composed.  On  March  24th,  we  reached  a depth  of  25.1  feet 
below  datum  level,  or  28.2  feet  below  the  average  surface  of  the  ground,  and  found  that 
owing  to  the  presence  of  water  we  could  go  down  no  further.^  At  the  \'ery  bottom  of  this 
deep  cutting,  objects  attributable  to  the  Harappa  Culture  were  found,  and  there  seems  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  lowest  strata  of  that  culture  will  never  be  reached  at  Chanhu-daro 
without  the  aid  of  expensive  pumping  equipment." 

Because  the  Cutting  was  begun  in  loose  alluvial  soil,  an  area  of  about  90  feet  square 
was  first  cleared  to  a depth  of  about  4 feet  below  datum.  In  so  doing,  we  unearthed  a 
group  of  buildings  (PI.  VI,  I)  which  proved  to  be  of  the  greatest  interest,  for  all  were  out 
of  alignment  with  those  of  Harappa  II  occupation.  These  new  buildings  (Pi.  XII,  c,  e) 
definitely  constituted  a Harappa  III  occupation  and  I have  no  doubt  that  they  will  eventually 
be  found  to  link  up  with  others,  as  yet  uncleared,  which  lie  beneath  the  Harappa  buildings 
already  excavated  (PI.  XIII,  d). 

As  far  as  could  be  seen,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  continuity  between  the  Harappa 
II  and  Harappa  III  Periods;  no  wall  of  the  former  occupation  was  built  on  a wall  of  the 
earlier  period  as  foundation,  and  there  was  a considerable  layer  of  debris  between  the  two. 
The  average  level  of  the  foundations  of  the  Harappa  II  occupation  (background  of  PI. 
XII,  c)  was  +8.7  feet;  that  of  Harappa  III  (foreground  of  the  same  illustration  and  Pi. 
XII,  e)  was  more  than  7 feet  lower.^ 

From  the  state  of  the  buildings  of  this  Harappa  III  occupation,  it  is  apparent  that 
they  had  been  left  derelict  and  were  never  re-occupied;  a flood  had  undermined  them  and 
left  many  walls  ready  to  fall  (Pi.  XII,c,e).  Indeed,  we  had  to  remove  the  upper  portions 
of  several  before  their  foundations  could  be  properly  examined.  This  flood  was  quite  as 
destructive  as  the  one  which  at  a later  date  brought  the  Harappa  I occupation  also  to  an 
end.  We  have,  indeed,  definite  proof  that  two,  if  not  three,  floods  wrought  havoc  in  the 
ancient  city. 

The  plans  and  photographs  of  Harappa  I and  Harappa  II  occupations  (Pis.  Ill,  IV, 
XV)  show  marked  divergences  in  their  layouts,  while  the  remains  of  Harappa  III  occupa- 
tion are  differently  orientated  from  both.  As  we  have  seen,  definite  layers  of  debris,  com- 
posed of  broken  brick,  brick-dust,  and  potsherds,  separated  these  three  superimposed  strata; 
nor  was  any  wall  of  an  upper  level  aligned  on  one  of  the  occupation  below  save  by  accident. 

^ On  March  25th,  the  surface  of  this  sub-soil  water  was  25.5  feet  below  our  datum  level. 

^ It  will  be  remembered  that  water  also  prevented  us  from  examining  the  earliest  levels  of 
Mohenjo-daro. 

® -j-  1. 1 feet. 


12 


THE  CUTTING 


13 


The  remains  of  Chanhu-daro  were,  in  consequence,  far  easier  to  understand  than  those  of 
Mohenjo-daro,  where  walls  were  continually  raised  in  the  self-same  alignment  as  the 
levels  of  the  city  rose. 

The  plan  (Pi.  VI,  I)  of  Harappa  III  explains  itself,  but  reference  should  he  made  to 
the  photographs  on  Pl.XII,b,  c,  e.  The  large  chamber  421,423,  whose  northern  corner  is 
missing,  was  estimated  to  have  been  a little  under  27  feet  long  and  rather  over  i o feet  wide. 
It  must  have  been  entered  from  the  north-west  through  a doorway  that  had  been  demolished 
anciently.  PI.  XII,  e shows  the  dilapidated  state  of  the  north-eastern  wall;  when  found,  it 
stood  considerably  higher  than  in  the  photograph,^  but  had  to  be  partly  dismantled  for 
safety’s  sake. 

Apart  from  its  size  and  the  one-time  excellence  of  the  masonry,  there  was  little  of 
interest  in  this  room.  Noticeable,  however,  was  a footing  along  its  south-eastern  wall  at 
the  level  -f  5.8  feet,  the  present  top  of  the  wall  being  about  a foot  higher.  The  south- 
western wall  was  exceptionally  well  preserved  and  was  higher  than  any  near  bv.'^  The 
middle  of  this  chamber  (locus  423)  yielded  the  dish  of  a food-stand  (3958,  Pi.  XXV,  2) 
and  a sherd  of  perforated  ware  (4384,  PL  XXVI,  2),  the  first  being  found  just  above  the  top 
level  of  its  walls  at  + 7.7  feet  and  the  second  on  a level  with  the  foundations.  Locus  421 
produced  the  stone  pendant  (No.  4005)  illustrated  in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  6,  the  clav  whorl 
(4383)  seen  in  Pi.  XCII,  4,  a sherd  of  the  interesting  corrugated  ware  (4989)  shown  in 
Pi.  XXVI,  67,  and  a drill  socket  (4990)  pictured  in  Pi.  XCII,  10.  The  first  was  unearthed 
at  the  level  + 4.3  feet  and  the  last  three  at  + 0.5  feet.  A pottery  jar-cover  (5 1 09,  Pi.  XXIX, 
57)  was  recovered  from  here  also  at  the  depth  of  i foot  below  datum  level. 

Room  470  was  about  20  feet  long  by  14  feet  wide,"*  and  its  north-eastern  wall  was 
one  brick  thinner  than  the  south-western  wall  of  room  421,  423  (2  feet  4 inches  in  thick- 
ness), against  which  it  abutted  with  a space  between  varying  from  2 to  4 inches  in  width; 
the  foundation  levels  and  heights  of  these  walls  were  practically  the  same.  In  the  north- 
western corner  of  this  room  was  a circular  pavement,  9 feet  10  inches  in  diameter  and 
one  brick  in  thickness,  which  was  made  of  both  whole  and  broken  bricks.  In  the  middle  of 
this  pavement,  but  separated  from  it  by  a thin  layer  of  rubbish,  stood  a brick  column 
22  inches  square  and  18  inches  high.^ 

Similar  circular  brick  pavements  have  been  found  at  iMohenjo-daro  and  Harappa: 
sometimes  a large  potter)"  jar  had  been  sunk  in  the  centre,^  and  it  is  possible  that  these 
pavements  were  used  in  some  way  in  the  hulling  of  grain.  There  was,  however,  no  place 
for  a jar  in  the  centre  of  this  particular  pavement  and  the  little  column  was  evidently  built 
when  the  pavement  was  no  longer  in  use.° 

* Its  foundations  were  3.5  ft.  above  datum. 

^ The  foundations  were  0.6  ft.  above  datum,  and  most  of  it  was  a little  under  5 ft.  high. 

It  could  not  be  measured  with  accuracy  because  of  curvature  due  to  subsidence  of  the 
south-western  wall. 

^ Its  base  was  5.3  ft.  above  datum. 

® A second  example  may  be  seen  in  PI.  IV,  sq.  7/E.  loc.  306. 

® F.  E.  AI.  (E.  iSlackav/ Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo  Daro.  2 vols.  Delhi,  1938),  p.  167. 
Circular  pavements  are  also  known  at  Ur,  for  which  see  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  V,  p.  10, 
pis.  3(a);  66. 


14 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


The  remains  of  another  pavement,  one  brick  thick,  were  found  in  the  south-eastern 
corner  of  the  same  room.  This  floor,  which  had  subsided  ver^^  badly,  was  9 feet  2 inches 
long  by  4 feet  8 inches  wide,  with  an  average  level  of  + 3.9  feet.  It  may  have  been  used 
as  an  ablution  floor,  or  possibly  the  whole  room  had  at  one  time  been  paved.  The  circular 
floor  already  mentioned  was  at  a slightly  lower  level. 

Beneath  the  middle  buttress  supporting  the  south-western  wall  of  this  room  lay  an 
elephant’s  tusk  (No.  3815),  26  inches  long  and  about  5 inches  in  diameter  at  one  end, 
which  was  in  a very  friable  condition  (PI.  XVI,  d).  The  buttress  measured  26  inches  by 
19  inches  and  24  inches  high,  its  base  being  2 feet  above  datum.  As  there  were  no  indica- 
tions that  this  room  had  been  used  for  ivory  working— in  fact  it  was  singularly  hare  of 
objects— the  care  that  had  been  taken  to  conceal  this  tusk  suggests  that  it  was  stolen  property. 

A doorway,  3 feet  4 inches  wide,  at  the  north-western  corner  of  room  470  led  into 
room  466,  which  was  18  feet  7 inches  long.  This  room  also  was  in  a very  ruined  condition, 
except  for  its  north-western  and  south-eastern  ends.  In  the  latter  wall  was  a niche,  34  inches 
wide  and  19  inches  deep,  with  its  base  at  the  level  4-  3.9  feet,  from  which  the  height  of 
the  wall  was  26  inches.  Two  unusual  clay  models  of  bulls  (3838,  Pi.  LV,  9 and  3839, 
PI.  LV,  4),  which  are  possibly  of  Jhukar  date,  and  a fossil  shell  (3844,  Pi.  XCIII,  23)  were 
found  in  front  of  this  niche  at  the  level  + 2.3  feet.  The  fossil  had  probably  been  valued  as 
a curio.  Some  two  feet  lower  the  copper  or  bronze  axe  (4313)  illustrated  in  Pl.LXX,  29 
was  unearthed  at  practically  datum  level. 

A round  brick  structure  near  the  door  of  this  same  room,  21  inches  in  diameter  inside 
and  standing  1 5 inches  high,^”  had  been  used  either  as  a kiln  or  as  a fire-place;  its  bricks 
showed  slight  marks  of  burning  and  a little  wood  ash  was  found  in  it.  Of  the  doorway  into 
room  482,  the  south-eastern  jamb  was  very  indefinite  and  might  well  have  been  a later 
addition.  The  north-western  corner  of  this  room  (481)  yielded  the  potter)^  bowl  (4932, 
Pi.  XXVII,  57)  at  -f  1.7  feet.  Other  antiquities  found  here  include  a hone  (5095,  Pi.  XCI, 
44)  and  the  jar  stopper  of  unusual  type  (4844)  shown  in  Pi.  XXIX,  69.  Both  come  from 
the  level  of  — 2.2  feet,  which  is  some  three  feet  below  the  foundations  of  this  badly  wrecked 
apartment. 

There  is  little  to  say  about  rooms  482,  484,  and  487.  They  were  irregular  in  shape, 
as  will  be  seen  on  the  plan  (Pi.  VI),  and  their  walls  varied  in  thickness,  while  their 
foundations  were  at  about  the  same  level.”  Some  of  the  masonry  in  these  Harappa  III 
buildings  was  fairly  massive,  notably  the  north-western  wall  of  room  481,  which  was 
4 feet  thick. 

Room  482  provided  no  objects,  but  chamber  484  contained  the  pottery  tube  (4804) 
seen  in  PI.  LXXXVIII,  10  and  a fragment  of  cut  pottery  (4749)  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXVIII, 
6,  both  at  + 1.3  feet,  or  about  foundation  level.  A clay  model  of  a bull  (4175,  PI.  LV,  12), 
possibly  of  Jhukar  date,  was  found  also  in  this  room  about  18  inches  lower.  Room  487 
yielded  little  of  interest. 

Its  base  level  was  — o.i  ft. 

”-j-i.4ft. 


THE  CUTTING 


15 


These  remains  of  the  Harappa  III  occupation  that  we  cleared  in  making  the  “ Cutting,” 
represent  three,  if  not  four,  separate  houses,  all  of  them  quite  small  but  evidently  the  homes 
of  fairly  well-to-do  people.  A careful  search  by  their  owners  for  obiects  of  value  after  the 
flood  which  had  wrecked  these  dwellings  had  subsided,  unfortunately  left  little  for  us  to 
find.  But  unfinished  beads  and  broken  stone  drills  in  some  of  the  rooms  show  their  occu- 
pants to  hav'^e  been  bead-makers,  as  were  the  people  who  lived  in  the  houses  of  the  next  or 
Harappa  II  occupation,  some  7 feet  higher. 

In  the  northern  corner  of  the  “ Cutting  ” we  exposed  the  upper  part  of  an  immense 
mud-brick  structure  C408,  420,  473).  This  platform  averaged  13  feet  6 inches  wide  and  we 
traced  it  for  a distance  of  about  30  feet  to  the  north-west,  where  it  was  lost  in  the  side 
of  the  Cutting.  When  work  is  resumed  at  Chanhu-daro,  we  hope  to  clear  this  mass  of 
masonry  completely.  The  part  examined  was  near  the  edge  of  the  mound;  it  was  conse- 
quently badly  weathered.  It  was  possible  to  trace  it  to  a depth  of  about  12  feet,^“  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  was  part  of  a mud-brick  platform,  similar  to  manv  unearthed 
at  Mohenjo-daro,  on  which  houses  were  raised  to  keep  them  above  flood  level.  These 
platforms  are  usually  so  compacted  by  their  weight  and  damp  that  it  is  difficult  to  detect 
their  artificial  nature.  In  this  case  we  were  unable  to  extract  single  bricks  for  measurement 
until  the  platform  had  dried  out  sufficiently  to  allow  the  courses  to  become  clearly  visible. 
Two  sizes  of  bricks  had  been  used,  namely,  i i%x6x3  inches  and  i iWx  inches. 

On  this  mud-brick  mass,  at  its  western  end,  were  the  remains  of  a drain,  4 inches 
wide  and  2V2  inches  deep,  constructed  of  burnt  brick.  A fragment  of  a toy  cart  (5282, 
PI.  LVIII,  18),  a stone  palette  (4335,  Pi.  XCI,  34),  and  a dish  from  a food-stand  C5332, 
Pi.  XXV,  9)  were  also  lying  on  this  platform  at  levels  from  0.9  to  — 4.6  feet  below  datum. 

Near  this  mud-brickwork  were  three  brick  columns  (468,475),  evidently  portions  of 
one  or  two  houses,  whose  foundation  levels  ranged  from  +0.3  to  —2.1  feet.  The  “L”- 
shaped  pier  to  the  south-east  was  24  inches  long  from  north-east  to  south-west  and  1 8 inches 
high.  A clay  model  cart-frame  (51 59,  PI.  LVIII,  9)  and  a pottery  animal  (471 8,  Pi.  LV,  ii) 
were  lying  in  the  vicinity  of  the  columns  in  locus  475  at  the  depth  of  — 0.6  feet. 

At  locus  469  part  of  the  corner  of  a room  still  stood  about  14  inches  high  (PI.  XII,  e, 
middle  distance). Here  just  below  foundation  level,  was  found  the  copper  fish-hook 
(3812)  seen  in  Pi.  LXXIII,8  and  lower  still  a seal  (4852,  Pi.  LII,  5)  at  —2.8,  and  three 
painted  sherds  (5312-14,  PI.  XXXVII,  4,  34,  36)  2 feet  lower.  The  curious  potter)'  stand 
(5316)  illustrated  in  PI.  XCI,  7 came  from  not  far  away  and  from  the  same  level. 

The  broken  masonry  (474, 483, 489,  and  479)  probably  once  formed  part  of  the  corner 
wall  referred  to.  The  best  preserved  portions  of  the  remains  of  a washing  pavement  (loc. 
483;  Pi.  XII,  e),  4 feet  6 inches  long  by  3 feet  3 inches  wide,  was  edged  with  a skirting 
2I4  inches  high.  The  surface  of  this  pavement,  which  was  constructed  of  three  courses  of 
brick,  was  at  the  level  -k  2.9  feet.  Near  by  stood  a wall,  one  brick  thick,  several  openings 
in  which  were  obviously  designed  to  allow  the  water  from  the  pavement  to  drain  away. 

Its  average  upper  and  lower  levels  were  + 0.7  and  — 1 1 .6  ft.  and  its  upper  surface  was  concave 

This  comer  wall  was  1 1 inches  thick  and  its  base  was  3.4  ft.  above  datum. 


i6 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


In  this  wall  was  also  a doorway,  2 feet  4 inches  wide,  with  the  sill  at  the  level  +2.6  feet 
and  the  jamhs  only  standing  a few  inches  higher. 

A long  wall  (483),  only  half  a brick  thick,  which  ran  north-eastwards  from  the 
pavement  was  like  the  other  walling  close  hy  in  being  only  two  courses  high.^^  A few 
feet  of  drain  (474),  3%  inches  wide  by  2 inches  deep,  which  ran  north-west  to  south-east, 
together  with  a wall  parallel  to  it,  formed  the  end  of  this  little  complex  of  masonry'.  This 
latter  wall  was  21  inches  thick,  about  18  inches  high,  and  a length  of  nearly  8 feet  re- 
mained; in  it  were  two  drain-holes,  5ki  inches  wide  and  9 inches  high.'^^  No  objects, 
except  the  pottery  tumbler  (4801)  seen  in  Pi.  XXIX,  6,  were  to  be  found  at  this  com- 
paratively high  level. 

All  this  Harappa  III  masonry’  had  to  be  removed  in  order  that  we  might  go  deeper. 
A plan  of  the  still  earlier  masonry'  (Harappa  IV)  found  below  is  seen  in  PL  VI,  ii,  and 
photographs  in  Pi.  XII,  a,  b,  d.  A high  wall  (477, 479)  with  a right-angled  turn  was  the 
chief  feature  of  this  Harappa  IV  occupation.  A depth  of  some  1 2 feet  separated  the  founda- 
tions of  Harappa  III  and  Harappa  IV. 

Commencing  at  locus  477,  this  wall,  which  was  one  brick  (or  iol4  inches)  thick, 
ran  in  a north-westerly  direction  for  about  15  feet;  here  its  north-eastern  face  was  badly 
preserved.^®  It  then  turned  at  right  angles  to  the  north-east,  running  a further  distance  of 
nearly  18  feet,  where  it  met  a thicker  wall  which  projected  from  the  side  of  the  Cutting 
at  locus  479.  The  top  of  this  wall  averaged  1.8  feet  below  datum,  and  a footing  or  ledge, 
yLi  inches  wide,  was  about  3 feet  lower.  At  the  level  — 9.3  feet,  the  foot  of  the  wall  rested 
on  debris  composed  of  broken  bricks  and  sherds  and  the  fragmentary  remains  of  a still 
older  wall.  An  extensive  break  in  the  longer  section  suggested  that  there  had  once  been 
a doorway;  indeed,  its  north-eastern  jamb”  was  still  recognisable  though  there  was  no 
trace  of  the  other.”  It  was  impossible  to  discover  the  sill  level  of  this  doorway,  but  it  could 
hardly  have  been  much  higher  than  the  ledge  mentioned  above,  which  was  5.2  feet 
below  datum. 

Locus  477  produced  the  pottery  kohl-jar  (5126)  illustrated  in  Pl.XXMI,  89,  which 
was  found  in  the  rubbish  just  above  this  wall.  A pottery  jar  (5275,  PI.  XXVI,  71)  came 
from  just  below  its  summit.  The  debris  on  which  this  wall  was  standing  yielded  several 
objects  of  interest,  particulars  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  list  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

The  thicker  masonry  which  projected  from  the  side  of  the  Cutting  at  locus  479  ivas 
I foot  9 inches  thick  and  down  its  south-western  face  ran  two  \'ertical  channels,  SV2  inches 
wide  and  i foot  4 inches  deep  with  a distance  of  GVi  inches  between  them.  This  u'all 
with  its  two  w’ater-chutes  (left-hand  corner  of  PL  XII,  b)  stood  some  2 feet  higher  than  the 
long  wall,  and  its  foundations,  at  the  level  —6  feet,  were  also  considerably  higher.” 

Its  base  was  3 ft.  above  datum. 

The  bases  of  these  were  at  -{-  2.9  feet,  i.  e.,  3 ins.  above  the  foundations  of  the  wall. 

The  bricks  of  this  wall  measured  iol4  x x 2 inches. 

In  the  middle  foreground  of  PI.  XII,  b. 

The  break  allowed  for  a doorw'ay  of  the  usual  width  (3  ft.  4 ins.)  or  even  larger. 

The  top  of  this  wall  was  0.3  ft.  above  datum,  and  the  bases  of  the  two  chutes  were  at  the 
level  — 3.7  ft.  The  bricks  measured  iol4  x 5 x 2 inches  in  size. 


THE  CUTTING 


17 


It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  thicker  wall  was  built  by  the  people  of  Harappa  III  and 
that  the  long,  thin  wall,  as  already  suggested,  belonged  to  Harappa  IV. 

Close  to  the  southern  end  of  the  long  wall,  near  locus  477,  traces  were  found  of  a 
third  and  wider  wall,  standing  only  a few  inches  high,""  whose  position  and  level  showed 
that  it  had  no  connection.  At  locus  489,  a block  of  seven  courses  of  masonry  stood  1 8 inches 
high;  a portion  of  a wall  demolished  in  ancient  times,  which  was  estimated  to  have  been 
2 feet  8 inches  thick.  From  the  level  of  its  foundations  we  inferred  that  it  was  the  work 
of  the  people  of  Harappa  IV. 

A fragment  of  a wall  (locus  468)  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  Cutting  was 
2 feet  8 inches  thick  and  i foot  3 inches  high.  This  also  appeared  to  be  a relic  of  the 
Harappa  IV  occupation,  although  its  foundations,  at  —4.1  feet,  were  rather  high  for  that 
period.  From  here  was  taken  the  dish  of  a food-stand  (5330,  Pi.  XXV,  4)  at  about  founda- 
tion level,  and  a foot  lower  (—5.3  feet)  lay  the  painted  sherd  (5302)  seen  in  Pi. 
XXXVII,  II. 

The  well  at  locus  478  was  found  at  a considerably  lower  level,  as  the  photograph 
(Pi.  XII,  d)  shows.  Its  inside  diameter  was  2 feet  10  inches,  and  it  was  built  of  wedge- 
shaped  bricks,  pVi  inches  long,  3I4  inches  thick,  4V1  inches  wide  at  one  end  and  3V2  inches 
wide  at  the  other.  The  top  of  the  well  was  uncovered  at  the  level  — 16.3  feet,  but  there 
seems  ever)'  reason  to  believe  that  the  upper  part  of  its  lining  had  been  carried  away  by  a 
flood  and  that  the  existence  of  the  well  was  unknown  to  the  next  occupants  of  Mound  II. 

This  well  was  the  only  one  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  save  for  the  one  discovered  by  tbe 
late  Mr.  Majumdar  in  a trial  trench  in  Mound  III.“  Mr.  Majumdar’s  well  had  an  inside 
diameter  of  3 feet  6 inches  and  was  also  built  of  wedge-shaped  bricks.  The  top,  which  was 
badly  broken,  was  6.8  feet  below  datum,  and  on  January  ist,  1936,  the  water-level  in  it  was 
at  — 28.8  feet.  On  setting  up  camp  at  Chanhu-daro  we  raised  the  steening  of  this  well 
and  brought  it  into  use  again  after  an  inten'al  of  some  4,500  years.  It  also  now  supplies 
water  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  near-by  village  of  Jamal-Kirio. 

Plate  XII,  a show's  the  excavation  of  this  Cutting  in  progress.  The  work  had  to  be 
done  w'ith  care  to  ensure  that  the  sides  did  not  fall  in.  Wide  ledges  were  left  all  round  as 
paths  for  the  basket  boys,  with  stairways  to  the  ledges  below.  Not  only  did  we  prove  that 
traces  of  the  Harappa  Culture  existed  below  water-level,  but  we  also  found  convincing 
evidence  of  more  than  one  flood. 

The  few  objects  that  were  unearthed  in  the  lower  levels  of  this  Cutting  are  given  in 
the  list  at  the  end  of  this  Chapter;  in  the  main  they  are  not  particularly  associated  with 
any  structural  remains. 

Pi.  VII  (I  and  II),  are  scale  plans  of  the  Cutting  to  illustrate  the  various  levels  that 
were  dug  through.  These  are  briefly  described  below. 

Its  top  was  2 ft.  below  datum. 

The  top  of  this  wall  was  7 ft.  below  datum. 

Sub-soil  water  prevented  us  from  clearing  more  than  a few  feet  of  the  interior.  It  probably 
is  very  deep. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  36. 


i8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Taking  first  No.  II  which  shows  the  stratification  of  the  northern  side  of  the  pit,  we 
have  at  the  surface  a layer  (G),  varying  in  thickness,  of  rubbish,  pottery,  and  pulverized 
brick,  which  had  been  washed  down  the  sides  of  the  mound  during  numberless  rainy 
seasons.  Beneath,  a thick  layer  (F)  is  composed  of  water-deposited  silt  mixed  with  a little 
rubbish;  this  stratum  averages  5 feet  5 inches  in  thickness.  Below  again  (E)  is  a thick 
layer  of  debris  of  all  kinds,  mixed  with  a great  deal  of  broken  brick,  which  had  been  left 
by  people  who  robbed  the  place  of  its  bricks  to  build  again  after  a great  flood.  It  was  this 
flood  which  deposited  the  thick  layer  of  silt  marked  (D)  in  the  section.  Below  this  flood 
silt  is  a thin  stratum  (C)  of  debris,  beneath  which  another  layer  (B)  of  silt  marks  a third 
flood  period.  The  base  of  stratum  (B)  at  an  average  depth  of  19.9  feet  below  datum,  was 
remarkably  level,  never  rising  or  falling  more  than  a few  inches.  Stratum  (A)  is  a very 
thick  layer  of  water-logged  rubbish,  and  continues  below  the  water-level  at  25.5  feet 
below  datum. 


On  the  right-hand  side  of  this  section  will  be  seen  the  remains,  actually  about  12  feet 
high,  of  the  mud-brick  platform  already  mentioned,  whose  base  was  an  av'erage  of  1 1.6  feet 
below  datum.  The  top  of  this  platform  had  been  much  denuded.  The  remains  of  similar 
mud-brick  platforms  were  found  in  several  parts  of  Mound  II  (Pi.  IV),  and  to  judge  from 
the  level  at  which  they  were  unearthed  it  is  probable  that  they  were  all  built  by  the  people 
of  Harappa  III  occupation. 

No.  I in  PI.  VII  is  a section  of  the  middle  of  the  western  side  of  the  Cutting.  The 
same  three  flood  strata  (B,  D,  F)  appear  again,  but  as  this  part  of  the  pit  was  situated  in 
flatter  and  lower  ground,  certain  dilferences  were  observable  between  this  and  the  northern 
face.  Since  this  lower  ground  is  less  subject  to  denudation  than  the  actual  mound,  we 
find  two  more  flood  strata  (H  and  J)  above  level  (G),  which  represents  the  Harappa  II 
occupation.  The  layer  (I)  of  different  disintegrated  brick  and  potsherds  between  is  from 
its  level  clearly  debris  washed  down  from  Harappa  I occupation.  An  interesting  feature  is 
that  below  stratum  (B)  is  a thin,  but  quite  perceptible,  line  of  ash  which  did  not  appear 
in  the  northern  section.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  tilt  of  this  line  of  ash  is  in  a direction 


opposite  to  that  of  the  strata  above,  and  it  seems  justifiable  therefore  to  assume  that  the 
people  of  Harappa  V had  their  little  town  on  a site  that  was  overlapped  by  the  later  site. 
This  would  account  for  the  non-appearance  of  the  layer  of  ash  in  Pi.  VII,  II.  In  other  words, 
the  people  of  Harappa  IV  shifted  their  little  township  rather  off  the  site  of  their 
predecessors. 

The  intervening  strata  prove  that  the  several  floods  which  surrounded  the  little  city 
must  have  been  separated  by  considerable  intervals  of  time.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
these  floods  coincided  with  those  at  Mohenjo-daro.  Both  Chanhu-daro  and  Mohenjo-daro 
were,  at  the  height  of  their  prosperity,  close  to  the  river  Indus;  but  the  two  cities  were 
eighty  miles  apart,  so  that  they  need  not  always  have  been  affected  by  the  same  bursting  of 
the  river  banks.  At  the  present  day,  the  Indus  is  always  liable  to  break  its  banks  at  bends 
during  the  flood  season,  and  this  may  happen  in  just  one  place  after  a long  period  of  com- 
parative quiescence.  Personally,  I am  inclined  to  the  view  that  in  the  past  major  floods 
in  the  Sindh  valley  were  not  always  confined  to  one  small  part  of  it.  Extreme  weather 


THE  CUTTING 


19 


conditions  in  Sindh  are  known  to  correspond  with  similar  conditions  in  Mesopotamia. 
In  the  14th  Century,  a.  d.,  and  again  in  1929,  both  the  Indus  and  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates 
rivers  rose  to  unusual  heights  and  did  much  damage. 

It  would  be  most  helpful  in  the  question  of  dating  if  we  could  equate  at  least  one 
major  flood  stratum  in  the  two  cities  Chanhu-daro  and  Mohenjo-daro.  This  could  be 
done  with  any  degree  of  safety  only  by  comparing  the  base  lev  els  of  the  various  layers  of 
river  silt  with  the  level  of  the  sub-soil  water  at  the  same  date  in  both  cities.  Even  the 
latter  must  vary,  however,  with  the  season  and  the  situation  of  the  site;  and  reluctantly  I 
feel  bound  to  postpone  even  the  most  tentative  suggestion  until  further  excavation  provides 
us  with  other  and  more  reliable  data  for  comparison. 

As  yet  the  pottery  and  other  objects  found  at  Chanhu-daro  give  insufficient  guidance 
for  us  to  correlate  the  occupation  levels  of  Chanhu-daro  w'ith  those  of  Mohenjo-daro. 
The  following  data  might  here  be  put  on  record  against  the  time  when  other  information 
can  be  added: 

January  13,  1931.  Level  of  sub-soil  water  at  Mohenjo-daro,  34.2  feet  below  datum,  i.  e.,  144.51001 
above  mean  sea  level  (datum  = 178  feet  above  mean  sea  level). 

January  i,  1936.  Level  of  sub-soil  water  at  Chanhu-daro,  28.8  feet  below  datum,  i.  e.,  66.6  feet  above 
mean  sea  level  (datum  = 95.4  feet  above  mean  sea  level). 

March  24,  1936.  Level  of  sub-soil  water  at  Chanhu-daro,  25.5  feet  below  datum,  i.  e.,  69.9  feet  above 
mean  sea  level. 

OBJECTS  OF  THE  JHUKAR  PERIOD  FROM  CUTTING 

Square  g/F 

No.  4203,  PI.  XLIX,  8.  Locus  468.  Level:  +1.3  ft.  Bronze  seal. 

No.  5281,  PI.  XLVIII,  I.  Locus  475.  Level:  —2.5  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5024,  PI.  LX,  4.  Locus  469.  Level:  —4.9  ft.  Shell  gamesman. 

Square  lo/F 

No.  4269,  PI.  XLVI,  38.  Locus  467.  Level:  -{-4.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3957,  PI.  LV,  5.  Locus  378.  Level:  -f- 5.3  ft.  Clay  model  bull. 

No.  3917,  PI.  XLIX,  14.  Locus  470.  Level:  -f- 3.2  ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

No.  3918,  PI.  XLVIII,  2.  Locus  424.  Level:  -(-3.2  ft.  Lugged  sherd. 

No.  3919,  PI.  LIX,  36.  Locus  424.  Level:  -(-3.2  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  4302,  PI.  XLVI,  1 1.  Locus  466.  Level:  -(-2.9  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3498,  PL  XCII,  38.  Locus  465.  Level : -|-  2.9  ft.  Painted  head-rest. 

No.  3130,  PI.  XLVI,  14.  Locus  472.  Level:  -(-2.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4610,  PI.  XLI,  39-  Locus  471.  Level:  -(- 2.8  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  4512,  PI.  XLVI,  22.  Locus  379.  Level:  -(-2.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3768,  PI.  XLIX,  12.  Locus  465.  Level:  -(-  2.7  ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

No.  4003,  PI.  L,  10.  Locus 472.  Level:  -(-2.6  ft.  Faience  amulet. 

No.  3497,  PI.  L,  4;  LXXXVII,  I.  Locus 464.  Level:  -(-2.5  ft.  Stone  amulet. 

No.  4567,  PI.  XLIII,  I.  Locus  466.  Level;  -j- 2.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3840,  PI.  L,  14.  Locus  465.  Level:  -(-2.3  ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

No.  4814,  PI.  XLVI,  8.  Locus  472.  Level:  -(-1.9  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4707.  PI.  LX,  13.  Locus  464.  Level;  — 1.5  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  5164,  Frontispiece  (b),  2.  Locus  484.  Level ; — i .4  ft.  Painted  jar. 


20 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  4808,  PI.  XL VI,  15.  Locus  464.  Level:  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4746,  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  3;  XLII,  13.  Locus  464.  Level:  -f-i-sE-  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4745,  PI.  XLVI,  30.  Locus  464.  Level:  -j-i-sE.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5132,  PI.  XLVI,  2.  Locus  466.  Level:  —1.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5131,  PI.  XLVI,  31-  Locus  466.  Level:  —1.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4802,  Pis.  XXXIX,  It;  XL,  23.  Locus  465.  Level  -j-  i-i  E-  Lugged  vessel. 

No.  4213,  PL  XLIX,  7.  Locus  470.  Level:  + °-3  L-  Pottery  amulet. 

No.  4792,  PI.  XLII,  23.  Locus  475.  Level:  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4942,  PI.  XL V,  36.  Locus  472.  Level:  d-o-hft-  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4941,  PI.  XLVI, 45-  Locus  472.  Level:  -{-o.^h.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4227,  PI.  L,  I.  Locus  484.  Level:  + o.i  ft.  Stone  amulet. 

No.  4212,  PI.  LX,  14.  Locus  464.  Level:  + o.i  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  4795,  PI.  XL V,  32.  Locus  464.  Level:  -po-iE.  Painted  sherd. 

Square  10/G 

No.  4731,  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  I ; XLII,  17.  Locus  477.  Level:  + 0.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4731,  PI.  XLII,  17-  Locus  477.  Level:  + 0.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4729,  PI.  XLI,  46.  Locus  477.  Level:  + 0.8  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

No.  4582,  PL  XLII,  2.  Locus  481.  Level:  +0.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4422,  PI.  XLVII,  6.  Locus  480.  Level :+ 0.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  4174,  PI.  LX,  15.  Locus  482.  Level:  + 0.3  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  4799,  PI.  XLVIII,  23.  Locus  483.  Level:  —0.9  ft.  Large  pottery  pan. 

No.  5061,  PI.  XLVI,  20.  Locus  486.  Level:  — 1.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5035,  PL  XXXIX,  12.  Locus  480.  Level : — i .4  ft.  Lugged  vessel. 

No.  5041,  PL  LX,  18.  Locus  482.  Level :— 1 .4  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  5295,  PL  XLVI,  23.  Locus  477.  Level:  —4.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5311,  PL  XLVI,  35-  Locus  477.  Level :— 5.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  in  the  above  list  of  objects  practically  all  come  from  above  datum 
level.  Their  original  place  was  on  the  summit  of  Mound  II,  from  which  they  have  rolled  or 
have  been  washed  down. 

OBjECTS  OF  THE  HARAPPA  PERIOD  FROM  CUTTING 

Square  p/F 

No.  5045,  PL  XXIX,  24.  Locus  407.  Level:  + 10.8  ft.  Pottery  tumbler. 

No.  4016,  PL  XXVI,  59-  Locus  404.  Level :+ 4-9  R-  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  3811,  PL  LII,  29.  Locus  468.  Level:  -f  3-8  R.  Seal. 

No.  4504,  PL  XXXVIII,  16.  Locus  468.  Level:  + 3.8  ft.  Inscribed  sherd. 

No.  3949,  PL  LXX,  5.  Locus  410.  Level:  +3.6  ft.  Copper  chisel. 

No.  4737,  PL  LXI,  6.  Locus  409.  Level:  + 3.1  ft.  Pottery  rattle. 

No.  4063,  PL  LXX,  4.  Locus  420.  Level:  +2.9  ft.  Copper  chisel. 

No.  3938,  PL  LXX,  2.  Locus  410.  Level:  + R-  Copper  chisel. 

No.  5049,  PL  XXVII,  75-  Locus  409.  Level:  + o-5  R-  Pottery  kohl-jar. 

No.  5048,  PL  XCII,  6.  Locus  409.  Level:  -j- 0.5  ft.  Bobbin. 

No.  4950,  PL  XCIII,  32.  Locus  407.  Level :+ 0.6  ft.  Stone  mace. 

No.  5046,  PL  XXIX,  15.  Locus  407.  Level:  + 0.8  ft.  Pottery  tumbler. 

No.  4222,  PL  XCII,  5.  Locus  474.  Level:  -f  0.8  ft.  Clay  whorl. 

No.  5055,  PL  XXVII,  32.  Locus  407.  Level : -f  0.8  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  4779,  PL  XXVIII,  57-  Locus  428.  Level :— i .0  ft.  Painted  jar. 

No.  4770,  PL  LI,  5-  Locus  410.  Level:  — i.ift.  Seal. 

No.  4776,  PL  XCI,  20.  Locus  428.  Level:  — 1. 1 ft.  Paste  cylinder. 


THE  CUTTING 


21 


No.  4844,  PI.  XCI,  9.  Locus  481.  Level:  —2.2.  ft.  Jar-stopper. 

No.  51 17,  PI.  XXX,  21.  Locus  474.  Level:  —2.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5280,  PI.  XXXIII,  7-  Locus  475.  Level:  —3.1ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5020,  PI.  LIX,  13.  Locus  408.  Level:  —5.3  ft.  Faience  marble. 

No.  5192,  PI.  XXXVI,  14.  Locus  469.  Level:  —6.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5387,  b,  PI.  XXIX,  18.  Locus  468.  Level:  —6.8  ft.  Pottery  tumbler. 

No.  5342,  PI.  XXXVIII,  12.  Locus  475.  Level:  —6.9  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5356,  PI.  XXXVIII,  20.  Locus  469.  Level:  —8.2  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5193,  PI.  XCI,  8.  Locus  469.  Level:  —8.5  ft.  Pottery  stand. 

No.  5361,  PI.  XXXVII,  24.  Locus  475.  Level:  —9.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5393,  Pis.  XXXVII,  47;  XXIII,  4.  Locus  469.  Level:  — ii.oft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  5191,  PI.  XXXVI,  17.  Locus  473.  Level:  —12.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5372,  PI.  XXXII,  6.  Locus  473.  Level:  —12.5ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5372,  PI.  XXXVI,  I.  Locus  473.  Level:  —12.5ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5383,  PI.  LXXII,  6.  Locus  469.  Level:  —15.1ft.  Copper  awl. 

No.  5442,  PI.  XXXI,  1 1-  Locus  469.  Level:  —18.3ft.  Painted  sherd. 

Square  lo/F 

No.  4176,  PI.  LXX,  18.  Locus  484.  Level:  -{"  i°-3  ft-  Copper  awl. 

No.  4916,  PI.  LIX,  24.  Locus  484.  Level:  -f- ft.  Pottery  ball. 

No.  3957,  PI.  LV,  5.  Locus  378.  Level:  -f- 5-3  ft.  Pottery  animal. 

No.  4916,  PI.  LIX,  16.  Locus  484.  Level:  -|"t).ift.  Pottery  ball. 

No.  4381,  Pis.  LXIX,  10;  LXXVI,  22.  Locus  379.  Level:  -(-0.05  ft.  Copperpin. 
No.  3816,  PI.  LXXII,  20.  Locus  379.  Level:  -(-  0.05  ft.  Copper  pin. 

No.  5385,  PI.  XXVII,  46.  Locus  466.  Level:  —6.9  ft.  Large  bowl. 

Square  g/G 

No.  5300,  PI.  XXXVI,  1 1.  Locus  483.  Level 4.9  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5298,  PI.  XXXVII,  I.  Locus  483.  Level:  —4.9  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5440,  PI.  XXXI,  2,  3.  Locus  469.  Level:  —18.3  ft.  Pottery  sherds. 

No.  5442,  PI.  XXXI,  5-  Locus  469.  Level:  —18.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

Square  lo/G 

No.  5062,  PI.  XXVI,  13-  Locus  485.  Level:  —0.5  ft.  Pottery  jar-cover. 

No.  5032,  PI.  XXXVIII,  3-  Locus  480.  Level:  —1.4  ft.  Inscribed  sherd. 

No.  5036,  PI.  XXXVIII,  2.  Locus  480.  Level;  —1.4  ft.  Pot-mark. 

No.  5146,  PI.  LXXIII,  9.  Locus  478.  Level:  —6.6  ft.  Copper  ring. 

No.  5204,  PI.  LVIII,  14.  Locus  481.  Level:  —6.9  ft.  Pottery  cart-frame. 

No.  5390,  PI.  XXVII,  52.  Locus  478.  Level:  —7.2  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  5378,  PI.  XXXVIII,  28.  Locus  478.  Level:  —8.2ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5201,  Pis.  XXXI,  10;  XXXVII,  3.  Locus  478.  Level:  —9.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  5373,  Pis.  XXIII,  1;  XXX.  24.  Locus  478.  Level;  —9.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5205,  PI.  XXXVI,  13.  Locus  481:  —11.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5395,  PI.  LVII,  15-  Locus  477.  Level;  —12.5ft.  Pottery  animal. 

No.  5398,  PI.  XXVIII,  61.  Locus  481.  Level:  —13.4  ft.  Perforated  vessel. 

No.  5392,  PI.  XXXVII,  37.  Locus  478.  Level:  —13.4  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5404,  PI.  XXXVIII,  29.  Locus  481.  Level:  — 15.1  ft.  Resettled  slip  ware. 

No.  5403,  PI.  XXXVIII,  15.  Locus  481.  Level:  —15.1ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5416,  PI.  XXXVIII,  22.  Locus  481.  Level:  — 15.1  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5318,  PI.  XXXVIII,  27.  Locus  477.  Level:  —15.2  ft.  Reserved  slip  ware. 

No.  5418,  PI.  XXXVII,  14-  Xocus48i.  Level:  —15.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 


22 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  5417,  PI.  XXXVI,  2.  Locus  481.  Level:  —15.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5405,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  9.  Locus  477.  Level;  —16.2  ft.  Pottery  tube. 

No.  5448,  PI.  XXXII,  5-  Locus  481.  Level:  —18.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5447,  PI.  XXXVIII,  24.  Locus  481.  Level:  — 18.0  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  5445,  PI.  XXXI,  12.  Locus  481.  Level;  —18.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5408,  Pis.  LXXXVIII,  6;  XCI,  10.  Locus  481.  Level:  —20.5  ft.  Pottery  handle. 
No.  5436,  Pis.  XXXI,  7;  XXXVI,  38.  Locus  481.  Level;  —20.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  5451,  as  PI.  LXXXI,  2.  Locus  481.  Level:  —20.5  ft.  Cylindrical  wire  beads. 
No.  5430,  PI.  XXXVII,  25.  Locus  481.  Level:  —22.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5427,  PL  XXXVII,  43.  Locus  481.  Level :— 22.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5441,  PI.  XXXIV,  7.  Locus 481.  Level:  —22.0ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  5410,  PI.  XXIX,  13.  Locus 481.  Level;  —23.8  ft.  Pottery  tumbler. 

No.  5435,  PI.  LX,  2.  Locus 481.  Level:  —23.8  ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 

No.  5450,  PI.  XC,  19-21.  Locus  481.  Level;  —25.1  ft.  Shell  object. 


Chapter  III 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 

Scattered  over  the  summit  and  upper  slopes  of  Mound  II,  as  shown  in  Pi.  Ill,  were  a 
few  graves  of  early  Muhammadan  date,  each  a long,  narrow,  brick-lined  vault,  orientated 
north  to  south  and  roofed  either  with  bricks  set  pent-wise  or  with  a row  of  pottery  jars, 
mouth  downwards  (PI.  XVII,  d).  These  tombs  ranged  from  4 to  6 feet  in  length  and 
from  1 2 to  15  inches  in  width  and  depth;  ^ they  were  found  at  levels  ranging  from  + 1 5 to 
+ 23.5  feet.*  The  bricks  used  to  line  them  were  mostly  taken  from  the  ancient  buildings 
of  the  Jhukar  and  Harappa  levels,  but  in  one  or  two  the  bricks  were  of  much  later  date  and 
measured  inches,  11x9x1%  inches,  14x9x214  inches,  and  8x6x2  inches. 

Most  of  these  later  bricks  had  one  side  deeply  cut  in  chevrons  or  a wavy  pattern;  others 
had  decorated  edges;  evidently  they  once  had  an  ornamental  purpose.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  season  we  discovered  their  provenance,  namely,  an  ancient  cemetery  at  Malu  Sand, 
half-a-mile  south  of  Chanhu-daro,  where  are  large  numbers  of  graves,  some  of  them  shown 
by  inscriptions  to  be  several  centuries  old.  When  the  graves  of  this  deserted  cemeter)'  had 
fallen  into  decay,  carved  bricks  that  had  decorated  their  superstructures  were  carried  off 
to  Chanhu-daro  to  be  used  for  graves  of  a humbler  order. 

hlost  of  the  skeletons  in  these  Muhammadan  graves  were  in  a very  fragmentary 
condition,  owing  to  their  nearness  to  the  surface  of  the  mound.  Where  we  were  able  to 
ascertain  the  position  of  the  body,  it  was  always  extended  on  its  back  with  the  hands  close 
to  the  sides  and  the  head  to  the  north.  Usually  the  face  was  turned  to  the  west.  Nothing 
was  found  with  the  bones  save  two  globular  carnelian  beads  close  to  the  right  wrist  of  a 
woman  and  a small  piece  of  copper  (1528)  in  a man’s  mouth. ^ 

The  pottery  jars  that  sensed  to  roof  these  graves  were  of  two  types  (Pi.  XL,  1-3). 
Some  were  roughly  painted;  and  several  had  been  holed,  but,  I think,  not  purposely.  The 
tomb  (No.  83)  that  we  illustrate  in  Pi.  XVII,  d,  e,  was  6 feeet  10  inches  long  by  i foot  5 
inches  wide  and  was  found  at  the  level  + 1 5.0  feet.  Bricks  of  both  the  Muhammadan  and 
Harappa  Periods  had  been  used  for  its  slightly  corbelled  lining. 

Jhangar  Culture 

When  these  few  Muhammadan  burials  had  been  cleared  and  the  bones  suitably 
re-buried,  we  found  at  various  levels  between  + 18.9  and  + 22.8  feet,  jars  of  a polished 
grey  ware,  some  of  which  had  been  ornamented  with  simple  incised  designs  (Pis.  XXXIX, 
1-8,  XL,  5-1 1 ).  With  the  exception  of  the  bead  illustrated  in  Pi.  LXXXVII,  22  there  was 
nothing  associated  with  this  ware,  which  seems  to  have  been  left  on  the  mound  by  small 

^ One  grave  was  8 ft.  long. 

- The  summit  of  the  mound  was  -)-  23.5  ft.,  i.  e.,  28.5  ft.  above  the  surrounding  plain. 

^ This  was  square  and  very  thin  and  not  a coin. 


23 


24 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


groups  of  people  whose  habitations  had  entirely  disappeared.^  As  this  ware  is  fully  described 
in  Chapter  VIII  on  the  Pottery,  we  need  only  mention  here  that  similar  pottery  has  been 
unearthed  in  other  parts  of  Sindh;  it  has  been  named  “ Jhangar  Ware  ” after  the  site  at 
which  it  was  first  found  by  the  late  Mr.  N.  G.  Majumdar.^  The  two  examples  of  this 
pottery  that  were  found  at  low  levels  had  evidently  been  washed  down  from  above.  The 
other  pieces  were  found  in  Squares  8/D,  locus  82;  8/E,  loci  86,  87,  93;  9/D,  locus  95;  in 
all  of  these  positions  there  was  no  association  with  brickwork.  Unfortunately,  we  are 
unable  definitely  to  term  this  well  made,  but  primitive-looking  potter)^;  a fuller  discussion 
of  its  most  likely  date  will  be  found  in  Chapter  VIII. 

Jhiikar  Culture 

Almost  immediately  below  these  relics  of  the  “ Jhangar  Culture  ” there  came  to  light 
quantities  of  painted  pottery  which  bore  no  resemblance  either  to  the  Jhangar  ware  above 
or  to  the  earlier  pottery  of  the  Elarappa  Period  beneath,  now  so  familiar  to  us  from  Harappa, 
Mohenjo-daro,  and  allied  cities.  Similar  pottery  had  also  been  found  by  Mr.  Majumdar 
elsewhere  in  Sindh.  The  first  occasion  was  at  Jhukar,  which  place  has,  therefore,  the 
honour  of  giving  it  its  name.®  The  makers  of  this  interesting  Jhukar  ware  occupied 
Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro  after  it  had  been  deserted  by  the  Harappa  people;  indeed,  they 
took  up  residence  in  some  of  the  deserted  houses  of  the  Harappa  I Period,  after  raising  the 
walls  in  many  cases  with  generally  indifferent  masonry  constructed  with  Harappa  bricks. 
The  poorer  people,  however,  seem  to  have  lived  in  square  or  rectangular  huts  of  matting 
which  they  paved  with  broken  brick  (Pi.  XIX,  a);  their  fire-places  they  made  outside  their 
huts  with  low  roughly  built  walls  to  protect  them  from  the  wind  (Pi.  XVI,  b).^  One 
of  the  most  extensive  floors  left  by  these  Jhukar  people  (north-western  corner  of  Square 
8/D)  was  roughly  W2  feet  square  and  made  of  broken  bricks.® 

There  was  a somewhat  more  elaborate  fire-place  (PI.  XVII,  f)  in  one  of  the  re-occupied 
houses  (Square  8/E,  room  46,  91);  indeed,  it  was  made  as  a recess  in  the  upper  part  of  an 
ancient  doonvay  and  measured  2 feet  iki  inches  long  by  i foot  814  inches  deep.  In  it 
there  still  remained  the  three  bricks  on  end  that  had  supported  the  cooking-vessels,®  and 
there  were  ashes  both  on  the  floor  of  the  recess  and  on  the  earth  pavement  in  front  of  it. 
The  room  in  which  this  interesting  fire-place  was  found  is  seen  in  Pis.  XVIII,  b,  XIX,  b. 

There  were  other  recessed  fire-places  of  this  type,  which  seems  peculiar  to  the  people 
of  the  Jhukar  Period,"  in  the  following  rooms  all  in  Square  9/E,  namely,  room  85,  north- 
western wall;  room  93,  south-eastern  wall  and  room  1 12,  south-eastern  wall.  Their  levels 

* Probably  these  were  simple  huts  of  grass  or  reeds. 

® Explorations  in  Sind,  pp.  68-70,  78-79,  154,  156,  158. 

® Ihid.,  pp.  5-7,  9-18. 

’’  These  are  indicated  on  the  plan  in  PI.  Ill,  Sqs.  8/C,  loci  169,  307;  9/C,  locus  215;  8/D,  locus  202; 
9/D,  loci  130,  209. 

® At  the  level  15.8  ft. 

° These  bricks  were  cut  down  from  a larger  size  and  measure  5I4  x 4 x 3 ins.  in  size. 

At  the  level  + 1 7 ft.  The  wall  behind  this  recess  was  3 ft.  higher. 

The  Harappa  people  preferred  simple  platforms  of  brick. 


MOUND  II  CUPPER  LEVELS) 


25 


ranged  between  17  and  18.2  feet  above  datum.  That  these  niches  were  actually  used  as 
fire-places  and  not  as  cupboards  or  the  like  is  proved  by  the  thick  bed  of  ashes  found  on  the 
floors  of  three  of  them. 

The  floors  and  fire-places  of  the  humbler  matting  dwellings  were  situated  on  the 
eastern  and  rather  lower  side  of  the  mound  between  the  levels  13.7  and  15.8  feet  above 
datum,  i.  e.,  an  average  of  2 feet  lower  than  the  brick  built  houses. 

Where  this  Jhukar  People  came  from  and  how  far  their  influence  extended  we  do 
not  as  yet  know.  They  had  a well  defined  culture  of  their  own  in  spite  of  apparent  poverty, 
for  they  used  painted  wares  (Chapter  VII)  which  in  make  and  style  of  decoration  differ 
radically  from  the  pottery  of  the  Elarappa  I people  who  preceded  them.  They  also  used 
head-rests  (Pi.  XCII,  38),  again  foreign  to  the  custom  of  their  predecessors,  and  their  beads 
(Pi.  LXXXVII),  seals  (Pis.  XLIX,  L),  and  other  possessions  are  quite  unlike  anything 
found  in  the  Elarappa  levels.  That  they  were  great  mat-makers  is  shown  by  the  large 
number  of  bone-awls  that  they  left  (Pi.  XCII,  28,  30,  31,33).  In  short,  they  were  a civilized 
though  impoverished  people;  they  knew  enough  of  the  crafts  to  practise  glazing.  The  date 
at  which  these  Jhukar  People  occupied  Mound  II  would  seem  to  have  been  round  about 
1700  B.C.,  possibly  a little  earlier  if  our  estimate  be  correct  that  Chanhu-daro  was  finally 
deserted  by  the  Harappa  I People  about  2300  b.  c. 

Below  are  some  more  important  Jhukar  objects  found  in  these  high  levels,  many  more, 
as  already  stated,  had  been  washed  down  the  sides  of  the  mound. 

Square  6/F 

No.  1726,  PI.  XLIX,  1 1.  Locus  159.  Level:  -f- 16.6  ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

Square  y/C 

No.  1548,  PI.  LIX,  34.  Locus  loi.  Level:  +16.2  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  2240,  PI.  XLI,  41.  Locus  102.  Level:  -f- 15.5  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

No.  1756,  PI.  XLIII,  3.  Locus  102.  Level:  -4-14.9  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1798,  PI.  XLI,  47.  Locus  102.  Level:  -f-  14.1  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

Square  y/E 

No.  3399,  PI.  XLVIII,  21.  Locus  100.  Level:  -4-14.6  ft.  Pot-mark. 

No.  2130,  PI.  XL,  20.  Locus  88.  Level:  -[- r4.3  ft.  Footed  bowl. 

No.  1652,  PL  XLIX,  I.  Locus  1 21.  Level:  -[-13.2  ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

Square  8/C 

No.  1937,  PI.  XLIV,  1 1.  Locus  152.  Level:  -4- 16.6  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1939,  PI.  XLIV,  4.  Locus  153.  Level:  +16.5  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1594,  PI.  L,  16.  Locus  109.  Level:  -|- 16.5  ft.  Stone  amulet. 

No.  1938,  PI.  XXXIV,  18.  Locus  153.  Level:  -f- 16.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2251,  PI.  XLV,  23.  Locus  152.  Level:  -|- 14.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2273,  PI.  XLVIII,  6.  Locus  153.  Level:  14. i ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  1788,  PI.  XL,  24.  Locus  r 09.  Level:  -f- 14.0  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  2334,  PI.  XL,  26.  Locus  151.  Level:  13. i ft.  Painted  bowl. 


26 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Square  8/D 

No.  2091,  PI.  XLI,  2.8.  Locus  82.  Level:  + 22.7  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

No.  4788,  PI.  XL,  30.  Locus  82.  Level:  -f-  22.6  ft.  Pottery  jar-stand. 

No.  1281,  PI.  LX,  19.  Locus  82.  Level:  -f-^i-8ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  2065,  PI.  XL,  14.  Locus  82.  Level:  -p  2.1.4  ft.  Pottery  Bowl. 

No.  2070,  PI.  LIX,  43.  Locus  82.  Level:  +21.0  ft.  Knuckle  bone. 

No.  2066,  PL  XL,  21.  Locus  82.  Level:  -[-20.8  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  1754,  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  10;  XLV,  20.  Locus  84.  Level:  -j-  20.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2068,  PI.  XLll,  9.  Locus  82.  Level:  -j- 20.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1776,  PI.  XLVIIl,  3.  Locus  84.  Level:  -f-  20.0  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  2121,  PL  XLVI,  12.  Locus  89.  Level:  +15.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1957,  PL  LXXVIII,  15.  Locus  183.  Level:  +15.3  ft.  Faience  button. 

No.  3175,  PL  XLI,  19.  Locus  178.  Level:  -j- 15.0  ft.  Stem  of  food-stand. 

No.  1982,  PL  LXXII,  19.  Locus  196.  Level:  + 14.5  ft.  Copper  pin. 

No.  1988,  PL  XXXIX,  14.  Locus  108.  Level:  -j- 14.4  ft.  Pottery  lamp. 

No.  2610,  PL  XLVI,  I.  Locus  107.  Level:  + 14.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3065,  PL  XL VII,  I.  Locus  84.  Level:  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2250,  PL  XLVII,  16.  Locus  89.  Level:  -Fi3-oE-  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2052,  PL  XCII,  32.  Locus  89.  Level:  +12.3  ft.  Bone  awl. 

Square  8/E 

No.  1279,  PL  XLVI,  36.  Locus  87.  Level:  +21.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1345,  PL  LX,  20.  Locus  87.  Level:  +19.0  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  2099,  PL  XLI,  18.  Locus  93.  Level:  -j-i^.oft.  Jar-cover. 

No.  1292,  PL  LIX,  40.  Locus  83.  Level:  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  1575,  PL  L,  3.  Locus  86.  Level:  +17.3  ft.  Faience  amulet. 

No.  1507,  PL  XXXIV,  24.  Locus 90.  Level:  -f  17.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1453,  PL  L,  7.  Locus  90.  Level:  4-16.8  ft.  Faience  amulet. 

No.  1659,  PL  LXXII,  22.  Locus  92.  Level:  -J- 16.3  ft.  Copper  pin. 

No.  3385,  PL  XLVIIl,  10.  Locus  94.  Level:  + 16.2  ft.  Incised  sherd. 

No.  1758,  PL  XLIII,  7.  Locus  90.  Level:  4-i5-3ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2086,  Frontispiece  (b),  5.  Locus  146.  Level:  -F  15.0  ft.  Painted  sherds. 

No.  2086,  PL  XLII,  4.  Locus  146.  Level:  -f  15.0  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  21 16,  PL  XLV,  28.  Locus  146.  Level:  -j- 14.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  21 1 1,  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  4;  XLVI,  33,  34.  Locuspi.  Level:  -Fi3-5E-  Painted  sherds. 
No.  1748,  PL  LXXVIII,  12.  Locus  146.  Level:  13.5  ft.  Faience  button. 

No.  2153,  PL  XL,  13.  Locus  113.  Level:  -Fi3-2'ft.  Pottery  jar-stand. 

No.  4033,  PL  XL.  28.  Locus  185.  Level:  -J- 12.9  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 

No.  3141,  PL  XLVII,  15.  Locus  114.  Level:  Painted  sherd. 

Square  p/D 

No.  1817,  PL  XLI,  37.  Locus  95.  Level:  + 19.8  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

No.  1394,  PL  XCII,  33.  Locus  95.  Level:  -j- 19.3  ft.  Bone  awl. 

No.  1395,  PL  LX,  28.  Locus  95.  Level:  + i9-i  E.  Grey  pottery  cone. 

No.  2060,  PL  XLV,  22.  Locus  130.  Level:  -F  16.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1935,  PL  XLIII,  10.  Locus  133.  Level:  4-16.7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1630,  PL  LXXII,  21.  Locus  130.  Level:  4- 16.7  ft.  Copper  pin. 

No.  1535,  PL  LIX,  33.  Locus  133.  Level:  -j- 16.5  ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  1551,  PL  LIX,  35.  Locus  133.  Level:  -F  16. i ft.  Bobbin  or  gamesman. 

No.  1886,  PL  L,  8.  Locus  136.  Level:  -J- 15.6  ft.  Faience  amulet. 

No.  1962,  PL  XCII,  30.  Locus  130.  Level:  4-i5-oft-  Bone  awl. 

No.  3177,  PL  XLVI,  7.  Locus  192.  Level:  4-i5-oE.  Painted  sherd. 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 


27 


No.  1963,  PI.  XCII,  28.  Locus  106.  Level:  -|-i4-9E.  Bone  awl. 

No.  1918,  PI.  XLIX,  4.  Locus  179.  Level:  -Li4-9ft-  Faience  amulet. 

No.  2373,  PI.  XXXIV,  19.  Locus  180.  Level:  -Pi4-8ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2018,  PI.  XCII,  31.  Locus  106.  Level:  Bone  awl. 

Square  p/E 

No.  2224,  PI.  XXVI,  73-  Locus  85.  Level:  -f- 20,0  ft.  Pottery  jar. 

No.  1505,  PI.  XLII,  14.  Locus  85.  Level:  + 19.1  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1846,  PI.  XLVII,  13.  Locus  123.  Level:  -f-  i8.i  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2510,  PI.  XL,  19.  Locus  137.  Level:  Painted  bowl. 

No.  1849,  Frontispiece  (b),  9.  Locus  123.  Level:  -|-i7-5ft-  Painted  sherd. 

No.  3937,  PI.  XLI,  42.  Locus  124.  Level:  +*7-0  ft-  Storage  jar. 

No.  1936,  PI.  XLV,  39.  Locus  152.  Level:  -|“  16.6ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1815,  PI.  L,  12.  Locus  124.  Level:  -|“t4-9ft.  Pottery  amulet. 

No.  3143,  PL  XLVIII,  2.0.  Locus  i6i.  Level:  -|-i4-4ft-  Incised  sherds. 

No.  2920,  PI.  XLII,  18.  Locus  131.  Level:  +13-7  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  201 5,  PI.  XLV,  24.  Locus  127.  Level:  +13.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2079,  PI.  XCII,  29.  Locus  181.  Level:  i3-i  ft.  Bone  awl. 

No.  2604,  PI.  XLIX,  2.  Locus  219.  Level:  + 9.6  ft.  Faience  amulet. 

Square  9/F 

No.  4191,  PI.  XLII,  10.  Locus  401.  Level:  -{-18.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  1958,  PL  LXXII,  18.  Locus  187.  Level:  -}-i3-7ft-  Copper  pin. 

Harap'pd  Occupation  I 

The  buildings  of  the  uppermost  Harappa  level  (Harappa  I)  were  well  preserved  only 
on  the  south-eastern  side  of  Mound  II.  Elsewhere  a great  deal  of  denudation  had  taken 
place,  and  as  the  plan  in  Pi.  Ill  shows,  on  the  rest  of  that  mound  only  isolated  walls  were 
found."  A much  larger  area  was  covered  by  the  houses  of  the  last  Harappa  occupation 
than  by  those  of  their  Jhukar  successors,  but  in  the  course  of  many  centuries  a large 
proportion  of  the  masonry  round  the  periphery  of  the  mound  had  been  washed  down  to 
its  foot.  Even  some  of  the  Jhukar  remains  lay  round  the  base  of  Mound  II,  occasionally 
with  Harappa  sherds  overlying  them. 

Even  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  mound  only  isolated  walls  remained  from  the  Harappa 
I occupation.  To  judge  from  their  thickness  and  their  lay-out,  the  houses  were  mainly 
small  and  unimportant,  though  the  pavement  (169)  in  Sq.  8/  C suggests  a house  with  some 
degree  of  comfort.  This  would  seem  to  have  been  the  floor  of  a room  some  1 7 feet  long  by 
8 feet  wide;  the  base  of  the  surrounding  w'all,  1 1 inches  or  one  brick  thick,  still  remained— 
though  only  one  brick  high— on  the  south  and  east.  The  pavement  itself  was  one  course 
thick,  with  the  bricks  laid  on  their  flats  and  orientated  east  to  west."  At  locus  151  in  this 
square  lay  part  of  a stag’s  antler  (1732),  whose  ends  had  been  severed  with  a saw,  and  close 
by  was  an  unfinished  weight  (1631).  Two  painted  sherds  (4299,  4298;  Pis.  XXXII, 
2,  XXXVII,  9)  and  the  large  pottery  bowd  (3345)  seen  in  Pi.  XXMI,  66  were  in  the  close 

For  instance,  the  large  storage  jar  (PL  XVII,  c)  found  in  Sq.  7/C,  locus  98,  was  no  longer 
connected  with  any  building. 

At  the  level  -j-  13.8  ft. 


28 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


vicinity.  All  these  objects  were  a little  over  12  feet  above  datum.  The  seal  (2467) 
illustrated  in  PI.  LII,  26  was  found  in  the  same  place  about  2 feet  deeper. 

A small  house,  apparently  of  only  two  rooms  C179,  193,  Sqs.  9/C  and  9/D),  could 
only  be  conjecturally  restored.  As  will  be  seen  in  PL  XVIII,  f,  the  remains  of  its  walls  stood 
only  a little  over  a foot  high;  their  foundations  were  at  the  level  10.8  feet  above  datum. 
The  more  substantial  masonry  south-west  and  west  of  this  house  is  shown  by  the  photograph 
in  Pi.  XVIII,  a to  have  been  built  on  foundations  of  debris  and  not  on  the  remains  of  earlier 
walls.^^  A carved  shell  hall  (2050,  Pi.  LIX,  1 5)  was  found  at  locus  215  close  to  the  base  of 
the  wall  here.  In  the  vicinity  of  the  thick  and  isolated  wall  at  locus  174  a shell  cone 
(1928,  PI.  LX,  37)  was  lying  just  below  its  summit,^®  and  not  far  away  at  locus  216  the 
pottery  jar-stand  (1922)  seen  in  Pi.  XXVI,  10  was  unearthed  at  the  level  + 1 1.8  ft.  From 
locus  21 1,  at  about  a foot  below  the  corner  wall  here,^^  came  an  unfinished  shell  ladle 
(4308,  PI.  XC,  6).  The  presence  of  these  three  shell  objects  implies  that  there  was  once  a 
shell  factory  in  the  near  vicinity.  Locus  95  produced  a copper  pin  (2193,  Pis.  LXIX,  8, 
LXXVI,  23)  which  has  a coiled  head  and  was  lying  at  the  depth  of  -f  1 2.  i feet. 

Still  further  in  the  same  direction  the  masonry  is  better  preserved.  Room  140 
(Sq.  8/D;  Pi.  XVIII,  b)  was  either  a single-roomed  house  or  part  of  a larger  building  that 
has  disappeared.  The  remains  of  its  substantial  wall,  2 feet  10  inches  in  width  and  only 
2 feet  high,^®  show  it  to  have  measured  9 feet  2 inches  across;  its  length  we  can  only  guess. 
That  this  room  had  no  connection  with  room  86,  176  to  the  south-west  of  it  is  proved  by  the 
two  walls  that  separate  them  with  a narrow  space  between.  The  solid  wall,  3 feet  6 inches 
thick,  on  the  north-western  side  of  room  1 76  was,  however,  practically  at  the  same  level  as 
the  walls  of  room  140.  These  rooms  are  seen  in  the  background  of  PI.  XVIII,  d,  and  again 
it  will  be  noticed  that  their  bases  rest  on  rubbish  and  not  on  other  walls. 

Room  140  contained  nothing  of  interest  except  a badly  broken  jar  in  its  south-western 
corner.  A painted  sherd  (3 1 33,  Pi.  XXXVII,  3 1 ) and  a red  ochre  stick  (2690,  Pi.  XCII,  27) 
were  unearthed  in  chamber  176  to  the  south-west,  the  first  just  above  the  foundations  of 
the  walls  of  this  room  and  the  second  a little  over  two  feet  below.  Locus  82  produced  the 
very  curious  faience  object  (2188)  seen  in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  i,  at  the  level  + 13.4  feet.  The 
pin  with  a coiled  head  (1859)  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXIX,  9 and  LXXVI,  24  was  taken  from 
locus  1 07  at  the  level  + 1 2.6  feet.  Exactly  the  same  type  of  pin  ( 1 349)  was  found  at  locus 
84,  where  it  was  evidently  an  intrusion;  for  it  lay  as  high  as  21.0  feet  above  datum.  Locus 
108  which  was  close  to  107  yielded  a pottery  jar-stopper  (1980,  Pi.  XXIX,  52)  at  + 14.6 
feet.  South-westward  at  locus  223,  lay  an  unfinished  seal  (2000,  PI.  LI,  9)  at  the  level 
+ 1 2.2  feet,  and  close  by  and  about  a foot  deeper  was  a large  sandstone  block  (4728,  Pi. 
XCIII,  10),  which  had  been  used  in  bead-making.  At  locus  196  to  the  east  a third  copper 
pin  (1982,  Pi.  LXXII,  19)  was  recovered  from  the  level  + 14.5  feet  and  close  to  the  thin 

Low  as  it  is,  I cannot  place  this  house  as  belonging  to  the  Harappa  II  occupation. 

The  level  of  their  foundations  was  4-  i3-5  R- 
^®This  was  standing  2ft.  Sins,  high,  its  base  being  12ft.  above  datum. 

About  a foot  high  with  its  base  at  -{-  12.7  ft. 

Its  foundations  were  at  the  level  4-  1 3-4  R- 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 


29 


walD®  at  locus  138  was  a copper  or  bronze  knife  (2028,  Pis.  LXX,  23,  LXXVI,  26)  at  the 
level  4-  1 3.2  feet.  Here  also  was  a copper  jar  (1800,  Pis.  LXXIII,  38,  LXXV,  16)  lying 
mouth  downwards  at  the  high  elevation  of  + 16.5  feet.  There  is  some  uncertainty  as  to 
whether  this  particular  object  is  of  Harappa  or  Jhukar  make.  High  above  these  walls,  and 
centering  round  locus  82,  a number  of  Jhukar  objects  were  unearthed  at  levels  ranging  from 
+ 22.7  to  +14.9  feet.  These  include  the  storage  jar  (1799)  seen  in  Pis.  XLI,  49  and 
XLVII,  34;  a pottery  amulet  (2488,  Pi.  L,  13),  and  the  stem  of  a food-stand  (3429,  Pi. 
XLI,  13). 

We  may  perhaps  regard  the  complex  of  walls  that  fills  the  greater  part  of  Square  9/E 
as  one  building;  its  south-eastern  side  has  been  conjecturally  restored.  Room  93,  96,  the 
partly  cleared  north-western  wall  of  which  is  seen  in  Pi.  XIX,  d,  was  fairly  well  preserved, 
with  walls  averaging  6 feet  6 inches  high."®  The  upper  parts  of  these  walls,  however,  had 
been  removed  before  the  photograph  was  taken,  owing  to  the  danger  of  their  falling;  in 
places  the  north-eastern  wall  of  this  room  and  of  room  46,  92  beyond  had  heen  as  much  as 
9 feet  high.  The  danger  was  partly  due  to  subsidence,  partly  to  the  inferior  masonry  of 
the  Jhukar  Period  which  composed  the  upper  portions  of  these  walls. 

In  the  south-eastern  wall  of  room  93,  96  was  a blocked-up  doorway,  3 feet  9 inches 
wide,  with  its  sill  at  the  level  -f  16.9  feet.  High  up  along  this  wall  further  south-west  was 
a niche,  3 feet  8 inches  wide  by  i foot  5 inches  deep,'‘  which  appears  to  have  been  a 
fire-place  of  the  Jhukar  Period.  The  lower  3 feet  of  this  wall  is  of  Harappa  I date.  In  this 
chamber  the  tine  of  an  antler  (1604)  was  found  on  a level  with  the  base  of  the  niche 
and  from  below  in  the  Harappa  I stratum  came  a painted  sherd  (3277,  PL  XXXVII,  13) 
at  the  depth  of  + 12.6  feet. 

Room  85,  south-east  of  room  93  and  entered  from  it,  averaged  8 feet  6 inches  long 
by  6 feet  wide."^  A niche,  2 feet  9 inches  long  by  i foot  7 inches  deep,^^  high  in  the 
north-eastern  wall  of  this  room  was  certainly  a Jhukar  fire-place,  for  wood  ashes  were 
found  both  in  the  niche  and  in  its  close  vicinity.  Well  above  the  walls  of  this  room  was 
found  the  fine  Jhukar  jar  (2224),  at  the  level  +20  feet,  which  has  been  included  by 
mistake  in  Pi.  XXVI,  73  amongst  some  potter)'  of  the  Harappa  Period. 

A carefully  blocked-up  doorway  in  the  western  wall  of  this  chamber  was  originally 
5 feet  6 inches  wide  and  was  subsequently  narrowed  to  3 feet  6 inches  wide."^  This 
doorway  gave  access  to  room  1 1 2 in  the  Jhukar  Period,  and  most  probably  in  the  Harappa  I 
Period  also,  for  the  wall  here  goes  down  to  the  level  + 13.6  feet. 

Room  1 1 2 was  9 feet  7 inches  long  by  5 feet  4 inches  wide,  and  a recess  in  its 
south-eastern  wall  appears  to  have  been  another  fire-place  of  Jhukar  date.'®  A buttress  on 

This  wall  stood  about  a foot  high;  its  base  was  1 1.7  ft.  above  datum. 

Their  bases  average  12.3  ft.  above  datum. 

Its  base  was  at  the  level  -[-  i7-3  P- 
--  The  wall  between  these  rooms  stood  over  5 ft.  high. 

Its  base  was  15.3  ft.  above  datum. 

-■‘Its  upper  sill  w'as  at  the  level  18.3ft.  and  the  lower  one  15.6ft.,  the  top  one  being 
certainly  of  Jhukar  date. 

It  measured  2 feet  5 inches  wide  by  13  inches  deep,  and  its  floor  at  the  level  -f-  17  ft.  was 
covered  with  ashes. 


30 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


the  eastern  side  of  this  room  had  been  built  to  support  the  wall,  but  with  indifferent  success, 
for  both  had  given  way.  A storage  jar  (1781)  lay  against  the  eastern  wall  of  this  room 
at  the  level  +14.5  feet  and  close  to  a filled  up  doorway  which  had  communicated  with 
room  85.  A second  jar  (2225,  PI.  XXVII,  68)  lay  also  on  this  side  at  a slightly  lower  level. 
The  interesting  socketed  axe  (1655,  Pis.  LXXII,  25;  LXXVI,  37)  of  apparently  Jhukar 
workmanship  was  found  in  this  room  as  high  as  17.6  feet  above  datum,  yet  well  below  its 
highest  wall. 

The  long  narrow  chamber  126,  150,  219  was  no  less  than  23  feet  7 inches  long  by 
7 feet  6 inches  wide.  In  places  its  walls  stood  8 feet  high,"®  and  the  poorness  of  the 
masonry  of  the  upper  Jhukar  addition  at  the  level  +15.0  feet  was  very  noticeable. 
Apparently  the  only  entrance  to  this  room  was  at  its  south-eastern  end;  it  was  only  2 feet 
9 inches  wide  and  had  been  blocked  up.  The  level  of  its  sill  (+  12.5  feet)  marks  it  as  being 
Harappa  I work,  and  it  was  probably  blocked  up  in  Jhukar  times.  Through  this  doorway 
the  somewhat  irregular  enclosure  128,172  was  reached  (PI.  XVIII,  e).  In  clearing  the 
northern  corner  of  room  126  the  faience  cone  (1600)  of  Jhukar  workmanship  seen  in 
PI.  XXIX,  68,  was  found  at  the  level  + 16.7  feet,  and  a second  one  of  the  same  make 
(1671,  PI.  XXIX,  67)  was  unearthed  in  the  western  corner  of  room  132  at  about  the  same 
level.  Close  to  the  south-western  wall  of  the  former  room  was  a large  painted  pan  of 
Jhukar  make  (1779).”  This  important  object  is  illustrated  in  Pi.  XLI,  50  and  again  in 
PI.  XLVII,  35,  where  it  is  shown  lying  in  situ  at  the  level  + 16.7  feet.  About  2 feet  higher 
came  the  Jhukar  dish  (1861)  which  appears  in  PI.  XL,  3 1 and  a sherd  in  PI.  XLII,  24.  There 
was  a surprising  absence  of  Harappa  material  at  the  appropriate  level  in  this  same  room  and 
a Jhukar  amulet  (1993,  PI.  XLIX,  15)  found  here  at  the  low  depth  of  + 12.8  feet,  was  an 
unexpected  find  and  should  be  regarded  as  an  intrusion. 

The  south-western  wall  of  courtyard  128,  172,  for  such  it  probably  was,  was  i foot 
1 1 inches  thick  and  still  stood  some  2 feet  high.  The  foundation  levels  of  this  wall  and 
others  in  the  vicinity  were  very  irregular  because  this  part  of  the  mound  had  subsided. 
They  all  slope  from  north-east  to  south-west  and  vary  between  11.6  and  12.7  feet  above 
datum.  The  curious  mass  of  brickwork  immediately  in  front  of  the  doorway  from  room  2 1 9 
is  difficult  to  understand.  It  is  some  3 feet  high  and  its  hollow  interior  was  much  too  small 
to  serve  as  a cess  pit.  Possibly  it  was  a buttress  with  an  earth  filling  intended  to  support 
the  very  thin  wall  that  it  abuts  against;  it  would  also  have  been  useful  as  a kind  of  bench  to 
the  people  who  used  this  courtyard  in  Jhukar  times,  and  it  effectually  blocks  the  Harappa  I 
doorway  against  which  it  lies."®  Alongside  it  was  a bin-like  construction,  about  8 inches 
deep  inside  and  5 feet  long  by  2 feet  2 inches  wide.  A large  storage  jar  found  in  this  bin 
suggests  its  domestic  use."'’’  This  bin  and  the  possible  buttress  alongside  it  are  seen  in  the 
middle  distance  of  PL  XVIII,  e.  A jar  of  the  Jhukar  Period  (3057,  Pi.  XL,  22)  was  un- 
earthed in  this  enclosure  at  the  level  + 1 1 . 5 feet. 

Foundation  level  4-11.2  ft. 

Its  exact  position  is  marked  on  the  plan  in  PI.  I. 

Its  foundations  were  at  the  level  4-11-7  ft. 

Its  base  was  13.4  ft.  above  datum. 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 


31 


South-west  of  this  courtyard  is  a large  room  (220,  221),  divided  into  two  portions  by 
a thin  partition  wall.  Both  parts  had  been  roughly  paved  and,  as  Pi.  XVIII,  e shows, 
floors  and  walls  had  subsided  very  badly.  The  paving  of  the  floors  was  very  rough  and 
may  conceivably  be  Jhukar  work.  Because  of  their  collapse  they  vaty'  in  level  as  much  as 
14  inches.^”  The  walls  around  certainly  belonged  to  the  Elarappa  I Period  and  like  the 
floors  inside  vary  much  in  level  owing  to  unequal  settling.^^  Subsidence  was  a very 
prominent  feature  of  this  part  of  the  mound  and  was  undoubtedly  due  to  floods  pene- 
trating the  base  of  the  mound  and  causing  it  to  drop  very  considerably.  Lying  in  the 
debris  well  above  the  floor  of  room  220  was  a bead-amulet  (191 1,  Pi.  L,  5)  and  close  to 
the  outside  angle  of  the  wall  at  locus  201  was  a copper  or  bronze  axe  (1994)  seen  in 
Pis.  LXX,  30,  LXXVI,  4,  together  with  the  fine  bronze  kohl-jar  (1977,  Pis.  LXXIII,  39, 
LXXVI,  32).  The  axe  was  at  the  level  + 1 1.2  feet  and  the  kohl-jar  some  two  feet  higher; 
both  are  of  Harappa  workmanship. 

The  two  rooms  124,  162  evidently  belonged  to  another  house,  which  may  once  have 
extended  well  to  the  south-west;  two  rooms  remained,  fortunately,  in  a good  state  of 
preservation,  and  of  their  very  substantial  walls  one  was  2 feet  1 1 inches  thick.  Room  124, 
125  was  1 1 feet  6 inches  long  by  9 feet  wide,  and  most  probably  there  was  once  a doorway 
between  it  and  the  adjoining  room  162,  187.  This  latter  room,  of  very  much  the  same  size  as 
No.  124,  125,  had  a large  bin  or  storage  place  in  its  north-western  corner,  enclosed  by  a wall 
one  brick  thick.®^  Just  above  this  bin  a quantity  of  wheat  and  other  seeds  (2345,  2347, 
2348)  was  found  in  a badly  carbonized  condition;  its  high  level  (_+  15.4  ft.)  suggests  that 
it  was  deposited  here  by  a Jhukar  inhabitant.  A small  store  of  grain  (2344)  was  also  found 
in  the  adjoining  room  (124, 125)  at  the  same  level.^^ 

At  the  south-western  end  of  room  162,  187,  a copper  pin  (1958,  Pi.  LXXII,  18)  and 
a copper  bangle  (1959,  Pi.  LXXVI,  20)  were  found  at  the  level  13.7  feet  above  datum. 
Room  125  contained  a jar  (3343,  PI.  XXIX,  i)  some  three  feet  lower.  The  last  object  is 
undoubtedly  of  Harappa  workmanship. 

The  outer  faces  of  the  north-eastern  and  north-western  walls  of  these  two  rooms,  which 
ranged  from  6 to  8 feet  high,  had  a pronounced  batter  which  can  be  clearly  seen  in 
PI.  XIX,  b.  This  batter  was  formed  by  inclining  the  bricks  of  each  course  slightly  down- 
wards to  the  inside  and  thus  forming  a slope  a little  over  5 degrees  from  the  vertical.  It 
is  difficult  to  conceive  of  these  sloping  walls  being  of  Jhukar  work,  whereas  this  method 
of  building  was  a prominent  feature  in  the  architecture  of  the  Harappa  people;  at  Mohenjo- 
daro  it  was  common  in  both  private  and  public  buildings.  This  house,  therefore,  from  its 
foundations  to  the  top  of  its  walls  belonged  solely  to  the  Harappa  I Period,  though  it  is 
certain  that  the  Jhukar  people  re-occupied  it  later. 

Their  highest  level  was  + 12.5  ft. 

The  base  of  the  south-western  wall  of  room  220  was  9.7  ft.  above  datum,  whereas  the  same 
wall  in  room  181  was  as  high  as  13.6  ft.  above  datum. 

This  was  I ft.  high  and  its  base  was  at  the  level  -j-  13.4  ft. 

For  a full  description  of  these  seeds  see  Chap.  XV. 

An  average  of  10.2  ft.  above  datum. 


32 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


We  could  not  expect  to  find  intact  buildings  in  Square  9/F,  owing  to  the  steep  slope 
of  the  mound  here.  From  the  remains  of  room  184  we  recovered  the  handled  amulet 
(1946)  seen  in  PL  XFIX,  3,  and  a painted  jar  (2242,  Pi.  XFI,  29),  both  being  of  the  Jhukar 
Period  and  coming  from  the  levels  + 13.7  and  + 13.0  feet  respectively.  Close  to  these 
were  the  singular  pottery  mould  (2012)  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXXXVIII,  1 1,  XCI,  35  and  the 
hone  (3278)  shown  in  Pi.  XCI,  37.  The  mould  was  quite  possibly  used  by  the  Jhukar 
people,  as  objects  of  this  kind  are  strangely  rare  in  Harappa  times,  but  the  hone,  which 
was  buried  iVi  feet  deeper  (+  10.7  feet),  is  undoubtedly  of  the  earlier  period. 

The  two  rooms  (104, 91  and  146)  in  Square  8/E  were  in  a good  state  of  preservation; 
their  lofty  walls  are  seen  at  the  back  in  Pi.  XVIII,  b.  That  they  belonged  to  a separate  house 
and  not  to  the  building  south-east  of  them  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  there  are  no  vestiges 
of  a doonvay  in  the  high  wall  between  (Pi.  XVIII,  c).^^  Room  104  was  entered  from  the 
north-west  and  was  8 feet  5 inches  long  by  7 feet  wide.  Its  doorway  (PI.  XVIII,  c),  which 
was  found  blocked  up,  was  4 feet  3 inches  wide  and  its  sill  and  jambs  had  sunk  very 
badly.^®  A small  buttress  placed  against  the  south-eastern  wall  of  this  room  had  possibly 
supported  a roof  beam. 

In  the  upper  levels  of  room  104  were  found  a painted  sherd  ( 1 869,  Pi.  XXXIV,  17), 
a spouted  jar  (2098,  Pi.  XLI,  44),  a second  sherd  (1847,  Pi.  XLV,  38),  and  the  stem  of  a 
food-stand  (2995,  Pi.  XLI,  22).  These  Jhukar  objects  ranged  in  level  from  -h  18.5  to 
+ 15.5  feet.  Lower  down  were  recovered  the  pottery  jar-stopper  (1721)  seen  in  PI.  XXIX, 
49,  a fragment  of  a steatite  bowl  (2178,  Pi.  XCIII,  30),  and  a copper  chisel  (1805,  Pi.  LXX, 
12),  at  levels  from  14.9  to  12.5  feet  above  datum.  These  last  three  objects  belong  to  the 
Harappa  Period. 

The  long  apartment  91,92, 146,  was  also  in  good  condition,  but  before  it  could  be 
cleared  the  Jhukar  masonry^  which  formed  the  upper  part  of  its  north-eastern  wall  had  to 
be  removed  for  the  safety  of  the  diggers; " this  was  not  so  much  due  to  faulty  building  as 
to  subsidence.  The  room,  20  feet  8 inches  long  by  an  average  of  8 feet  9 inches  wide,  was 
entered  from  the  court  185  by  a doorw'ay  3 feet  9 inches  wide  at  the  north-western  end  of 
its  south-western  wall.  This  entrance  was  subsequently  blocked  up  in  the  Jhukar  Period 
and  converted  into  a fire-place,  of  which  Pi.  XVII,  f is  a photograph.  As  in  room  104  a 
buttress  or  beam-support  had  been  placed  against  the  south-eastern  wall.  This,  which 
was  some  18  inches  square,  had  sunk  with  the  wall.  The  masonry  of  the  Jhukar  Period 
which  formed  the  upper  part  of  the  walls  of  this  room  was  very  poor  with  little  care  taken 
to  break  the  joints  in  the  brickwork.  Nevertheless,  the  height  of  these  walls  and  of  those 
adjacent  to  them  was  quite  impressive,  as  is  seen  in  Pis.  XIII,  a,  b,  XIV,  a,  XV,  a,  and 
XIX,  b.  The  south-western,  north-western,  and  north-eastern  walls  of  this  room  had  an 

This  wall  was  heightened  in  the  Jhukar  Period  and  when  excavated  stood  8 ft.  6 ins.  high 
with  its  foundations  at  the  level  + 1 0.6  ft. 

^®The  sill  was  13.7  ft.  above  datum  and  had  been  raised  from  an  original  level  of  -[-  12.6  ft. 
The  height  of  the  right-hand  jamb  in  the  photograph  is  17  ft.,  and  its  foundations  stood  at  the 
level  1 1 .8  ft. 

This  wall  is  also  seen  in  PI.  XVIII,  b. 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 


33 


average  height  of  7 feet,  some  4 feet  of  their  upper  portions  from  about  the  level  + 1 5.9 
feet  being  of  Jhukar  work.^® 

A portion  of  a stag’s  antler  (1725)  was  found  in  this  room  at  the  level  + 13. 5 feet; 
one  end  of  this  was  burnt,  a fact  suggesting  that  it  had  been  used  as  a poker.  A fine  pottery 
bowl  (21 12,  PI.  XXVII,  29)  also  came  from  here  and  was  lying  at  the  level  + 13.7  feet. 
Higher  up  and  belonging  to  the  Jhukar  Period  were  two  pottery  amulets  (1574,  1582) 
seen  in  Pis.  L,  9 and  XLIX,  10,  at  the  level  + 17.9  feet.  At  the  depth  of  16.3  feet  above 
datum  there  was  found  the  copper  pin  (1659)  shown  in  PI.  LXXII,  22.  of  a type  that  is 
also  known  in  the  Harappa  Period.  A great  number  of  Jhukar  sherds,  which  are  illustrated 
in  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  4,  8,  XLV,  42,  XLVI,  16,  33,  34,  42,  43,  XLVII,  14,  33,  were  also 
taken  from  this  room  at  levels  ranging  from  17.9  to  13.4  feet  above  datum. 

In  the  courtyard  185  to  the  south-west  was  a rectangular  bin  which  had  been  built  up 
against  the  doonvay  in  its  north-eastern  corner  after  the  latter  had  fallen  into  disuse 
(Pi.  XIX,  d,  right-hand  side).  The  bin,  which  was  6 feet  2 inches  long  by  i foot  4 inches 
wide  inside,  was  only  a few  inches  deep.^**  With  walls  only  one  brick  thick  and  its  earthem 
floor,  it  was  undoubtedly  made  by  Jhukar  people.  The  thin  wall  of  the  north-western  side 
of  this  court  was  also  built  in  Jhukar  times."*"  On  a level  with  this  wall  at  locus  1 1 4 was 
found  the  Jhukar  sherd  (1848)  that  appears  in  Pi.  XLII,  8,  and  from  lower  down  came  a 
jar-cover  (21 55,  PI.  XLI,  33)  at  the  level  + 15.9  feet.  There  were  also  a few  Harappa 
objects  found  in  this  court,  of  which  a pottery  bowl  (3073,  Pi.  XXVII,  55),  a jar-cover 
(3064,  Pi.  XXXIX,  19),  and  a copper  ring  (1908,  Pi.  LXXIII,  21)  are  examples.^' 

North-west  of  these  rooms  and  courtyard  were  the  remains  of  two  houses,  whose  thin 
walls  stood  two  feet  high.^^  A possible  doorway  led  from  the  north-east  into  room  103 
(Square  7/E),  but  both  jambs  had  disappeared,  or  the  break  in  the  wall  may  have  been  due 
to  brick-robbing.  A part  of  the  south-eastern  wall  of  this  chamber  is  seen  in  PI.  XX,  a, 
standing  some  3 feet  higher  than  a privy  and  drain  built  in  the  Harappa  II  Period.^® 

An  unfinished  shell  dish  of  Harappa  workmanship  (3155,  Pi.  XC,  22)  was  found 
below  room  103  at  the  level  + 12.0  feet,  and  in  the  room  itself  was  the  Jhukar  amulet 
(1426)  seen  in  PI.  XLIX,  5,  lying  at  -f  15.4  feet.  Locus  83  to  the  west  produced  another 
amulet  of  the  same  period  (1266,  Pi.  XLIX,  9)  at  the  depth  of  + 12.9  feet,  and  near-by 
lay  an  Harappa  seal  (1393,  Ph  LII,  16)  at  the  high  level  of  + 15.4  feet,  as  well  as  a pottery 
spoon  (1357,  PI.  XCII,  25)  and  a painted  sherd  (4973,  Ph  XXXVI,  34)  at  the  levels  -F  13.5 
and  + 11.6  feet  respectively.  At  locus  149  (middle  of  Sq.  8/F)  a pottery  rattle  (1599, 
Pis.  LIX,  8,  LXI,  4)  and  a clay  model  animal  (1971,  Pi.  LV,  15)  were  unearthed  at  about 
I i.o  feet  above  datum.  North-east  of  room  103  at  locus  121a  pottery  figurine  (1602,  Pi. 
LIII,  3)  was  recovered  from  the  level  + 13.5  feet  and  from  about  the  same  depth  and  a 

The  average  level  of  their  bases  was  13.2  ft.  above  datum. 

Its  floor  level  was  16.0  ft.  above  datum. 

It  stood  only  6 ins.  high  with  its  base  at  the  level  -j-  17  ft. 

The  levels  of  these  ranged  from  14.5  to  + 12.6  ft. 

The  bases  of  these  averaged  13.7  ft.  above  datum. 

Its  foundations  were  at  the  level  + 14.1  ft. 


34 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


little  to  the  north-west  came  the  head-hone  (1561)  seen  in  PL  XCIII,  1 5 and  a pottery  bowl 
(2163,  PL  XXVII,  24). 

Little  remained  of  room  97  (Square  y/E),  outside  which  was  a well  constructed  cess 
pit,  2 feet  by  i foot  2 inches  inside  and  only  9 inches  deep,  denudation  having  removed  most 
of  its  upper  portion.  Here  was  found  a steatite  seal  (1293,  PL  LI,  31)  at  the  level  14.9 
feet  above  datum  and  a potter\'  bowl  (3287,  PL  XXVII,  58)  about  4 feet  deeper.  Both  these 
objects  can  be  dated  to  the  Harappa  Period. 

Only  a corner  remained  of  a third  or  adjoining  room  (83,443)  to  the  south-west, 
standing  some  2 feet  high.^^  The  copper  finger-ring  (1621)  seen  in  PL  LXXIII,  20  was 
found  close  to  this  at  the  level  + 1 1.2  feet.  The  two  massive  walls,  ranging  from  2 feet 
4 inches  to  3 feet  thick,  that  straddle  Squares  7/E  and  8/E  were  relics  of  a most  important 
building.  Room  122,  143  measured  14  feet  6 inches  long  by  6 feet  6 inches  wide;  the 
restoration  of  the  other  rooms  is  conjectural.  A chisel  (1634,  PL  LXX,  20)  found  in  room 
122  at  the  level  of  its  foundations  must  be  ascribed  to  the  Harappa  I Period,  and  another 
(1989,  Pis.  LXX,  17,  LXXVI,  ii)  was  unearthed  three  feet  lower  and  from  under  the 
adjoining  chamber  142.  This  last  room  also  yielded  a bobbin  or  gamesman(?)  (1638, 
PL  LIX,  42)  at  the  level  + 14.7  feet,  an  object  that  was  largely  used  by  the  Jhukar  people 
but  in  what  way  is  uncertain.  Two  Jhukar  sherds  (1755,  5264,  Pis.  XXXIV,  21,  XLVII, 
28)  were  recovered  from  outside  the  south-western  wall  of  room  100  (locus  99)  at  the 
levels  + 17.7  and  + 16.8  feet  respectively. 

All  these  buildings  of  the  Harappa  I Period  had  been  heightened  from  time  to  time. 
And  the  Jhukar  people,  as  already  mentioned,  also  made  additions  to  them  when  in  turn 
they  occupied  the  mound.  The  base  levels  of  the  walls  built  by  the  people  of  the 
Harappa  I occupation  range  from  10.2  to  14.9  feet  above  datum.  The  Jhukar  additions 
and  restorations,  as  far  as  we  could  trace  them,  had  an  average  base  level  about  3 feet  higher. 
The  apparent  low  levels  of  certain  of  the  foundations  of  Harappa  I occupation,  e.  g.,  10.2 
feet,  are  to  be  traced  to  subsidences  and  sometimes  to  the  fact  that  the  upper  part  of  the 
mound  was  by  no  means  level  when  it  was  occupied.  There  was  no  difficulty  at  all  in  dis- 
criminating between  the  remains  of  the  Harappa  I and  II  occupations;  practically  no 
buildings  of  the  former  period  rested  on  the  remains  of  the  latter,  and  as  can  be  clearly  seen 
in  Pis.  XVIII,  a,  d,  f,  XIX,  b,  XX,  a,  and  especially  the  sections  in  PL  V,  a very  considerable 
depth  of  debris  lay  between  the  two  strata. 

The  sizes  of  the  bricks  used  in  the  Harappa  I Period,  all  of  which  were  burnt,  were 
1 1 X 5I4  X 2%  inches,  i oM  x 5H  x 2%  inches,  and  1 0V2  x 5I4  x 214  inches.  These  same  bricks 
were  used  by  the  Jhukar  people,  who  like  their  predecessors  took  their  toll  of  the  ruined 
buildings  round  about  them. 

The  following  objects  all  belong  to  the  Harappa  I occupation;  some  of  them  had  been 
thrown  out  of  buildings  that  had  been  robbed  of  their  brickwork  in  later  times. 

Square  6/E 

No.  3164,  PI.  XCI,  32.  Locus  431.  Level;  + 10. 1 ft.  Stone  weight. 

**  Its  base  was  13.9  ft.  above  datum. 

*=  These  averaged  i ft.  6 ins.  high  and  their  foundations  were  15.2  ft.  above  datum. 


MOUND  II  (UPPER  LEVELS) 


35 


Square  y/C 

No.  i8io,  PI.  LXX,  28.  Locus  135.  Level:  Copper  razor. 

No.  2349,  PI.  XXVIII,  I.  Locus  98.  Level:  Pottery  jar. 

No.  2280,  PL  XXXI,  14.  Locus  134.  Level:  -{■  12.2  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2318,  PI.  LVIII,  21.  Locus  98.  Level:  + 12.1  ft.  Toy  cart-frame. 

No.  2265,  PI.  XXVII,  43.  Locus  98.  Level:  + 12.0  ft.  Large  pottery  bowl. 
No.  1895,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  3.  Locus  98.  Level:  -(-12.0  ft.  Pottery  bulla. 
No.  1803,  PL  LXX,  31.  Locus  165.  Level:  +11.8  ft.  Lance-head. 

No.  2517,  PL  LXXXVIII,  13.  Locus  134.  Level:  -|“ii.6ft.  Pottery  tube. 
No.  4401,  PL  XXXVI,  32,.  Locus  135.  Level:  +11.3  ft.  Painted  sherd. 

Square  y/E 

No.  2020,  PL  LVII,  4-  Locus  204.  Level:  +12.9  ft.  Model  bird  in  paste. 
No.  1441,  PL  XC,  26.  Locus  88.  Level:  -j-ii-2ft.  Pottery  bangle. 

Square  8/B 

No.  2780,  PL  XXVI,  53.  Locus  234.  Level:  +ii.ift.  Pottery  jar-cover. 
Square  S/C 

No.  2271,  PL  XXVII,  87.  Locus  153.  Level:  14.1  ft.  Pottery  kohl-jar. 

No.  2308,  PL  XCII,  24.  Locus  170.  Level:  -f  11.9ft.  Pottery  jar-cover. 
No.  2198,  PL  XC,  32.  Locus  226.  Level:  -T  11.7  ft.  Drain-pipe. 

No.  2358,  PL  LII,  21.  Locus  152.  Level:  Seal. 

Square  8/D 

No.  2188,  PL  LXXXIX,  I.  Locus  82.  Level:  13.4  ft.  Faience  object. 

No.  3140,  PL  XXXVII,  38.  Locus  202.  Level:  4-12.8  ft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  2030,  PL  LIX,  17.  Locus  108.  Level:  -f- 12.7  ft.  Pottery  ball. 

No.  2177,  PL  LX,  8.  Locus  217.  Level:  -f  12.0  ft.  Faience  gamesman. 

Square  8/E 

No.  1481,  PL  LIX,  31.  Locus  90.  Level:  4- 1 4.1  ft.  Pottery  gamesman. 
No.  2176,  PL  XXIX,  50.  Locus  94.  Level:  -4-12.1  ft.  Pottery  jar-stopper. 
No.  3155,  PL  XC,  22.  Locus  103.  Level:  -j- 12.0  ft.  Shell  dish. 


Square  8/F 

No.  1617,  PL  XXIX,  51.  Locus  144.  Level:  4-  12.9  ft.  Pottery  jar-stopper. 

No.  2157,  PL  XCL  38.  Locus  145.  Level:  11.9ft.  Hone. 

No.  4655,  PL  XXX,  20.  Locus  163.  Level:  4-  1 1-5  R-  Painted  sherd. 

No.  2506,  PL  XXV,  18.  Locus  144.  Level:  -f  11.4  ft.  Dish  of  food-stand. 

Square  p/C 

No.  2007,  PL  XC,  35.  Locus  212.  Level:  -f  11.7ft.  Frag,  faience  bangle. 

No.  2199,  Pis.  LXVI,  6-21;  LXXV,  1 1-13.  Locus  227.  Level:  + 1 1.3  ft.  Copper  group. 
No.  1991,  PL  LXXXVIII,  14,  15.  Locus  212.  Level:  + 1 1.2  ft.  Two  drain  pipes. 

No.  2200,  PL  LXXI,  10.  Locus  228.  Level:  -fii.ift.  Copper  adze. 

No.  2361,  PL  LI,  32.  Locus  227.  Level:  -j- 10.9  ft.  Seal. 

No.  2693,  PL  XCIII,  33-  Locus  228.  Level:  4- 10.8  ft.  Mace-head. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


36 

Square  g/D 

No.  2516,  PI.  XXVI,  66.  Locus  192.  Level;  14.3  ft.  Pottery  bowl. 
No.  2039,  PI.  LIII,  I.  Locus  216.  Level:  ii.uft.  Pottery  figurine. 

No.  2288,  PI.  XXXIV,  4.  Locus  195.  Level;  -j-ii.oft.  Painted  sherd. 
No.  2295,  PI.  LXXVI,  10.  Locus  262.  Level:  + 10.7  ft.  Copper  chisel. 

Square  g/E 

No.  1912,  PI.  LVII,  10.  Locus  1 71.  Level:  + 14.6  ft.  Clay  model  bird. 
No.  2977,  PI.  XXVII,  48.  Locus  137.  Level:  i4-3  R-  Pottery  bowl. 

Square  g/F 

No.  2004,  PI.  LIX,  37.  Locus  187.  Level:  +12.8  ft.  Knuckle-bone. 


Chapter  IV 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 

On  comparing  the  plans  III  and  IV  with  the  sections  in  PI.  V,  it  will  he  seen  that 
as  far  as  the  alignment  of  their  walls  is  concerned  Harappa  occupations  I and  II  bear  no 
relation  to  one  another.  Between  the  two  periods  the  mound  had  clearly  been  deserted 
for  a considerable  interval  of  time  which  it  is  difficult  to  estimate,  and  hardly  a wall  of  the 
Harappa  I Period  rests  directly  on  one  of  the  level  below. 

The  remains  of  Harappa  II  were  hidden  beneath  an  accumulation  of  dust  and  debris, 
which  on  some  parts  of  the  mound  was  no  less  than  4 feet  thick,  and  the  newcomers 
(Harappa  I)  planned  their  buildings  as  if  the  site  were  entirely  new. 

Plate  XV  gives  panoramic  pictures  of  the  remains  of  these  two  periods  taken  from 
the  dump  to  the  north-east  of  the  mound;  by  the  end  of  the  season  this  dump  had  reached 
the  height  of  26.5  feet  above  datum  level,  i.  e.,  3 feet  higher  than  Mound  II  before  we 
began  to  excavate  it  (Pi.  XXI,  c).  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  many  of  the  ruined  walls  in 
the  lower  picture  are  not  so  high  as  they  appear;  at  the  close  of  the  season’s  work  we  left 
them  standing  high  on  their  foundations  of  debris,  which  had  been  trimmed  in  alignment 
with  the  walls  (Pi.  XXI,  a,b,  e,  f).  Thus  it  is  seen  that  Harappa  II  occupation  also  was 
by  no  means  in  alignment  with  Harappa  III  below;  after  the  former  period  also,  the  site 
had  been  temporarily  abandoned  and  our  deep  “ Cutting  ” (Chapter  II)  showed  that 
Harappa  III  occupation  was  differently  orientated  from  the  two  occupations  above  it. 

The  bases  of  the  walls  of  Harappa  II  range  between  7.7  and  9.8  feet  above  datum  and, 
though  we  have  only  cleared  a small  area  of  Harappa  III,  over  7 feet  of  rubbish  in  places 
appears  to  divide  it  from  Harappa  II  above. ^ 

In  the  excavation  of  Harappa  II  we  came  upon  the  upper  portions  of  solid  platforms 
of  unburnt  brick  (shown  by  hatching  in  PL  IV).  Platforms  such  as  these  are  well  known 
at  Mohenjo-daro,  where  they  were  expressly  constructed  to  raise  buildings  beyond  the  reach 
of  floods.  Only  in  the  “ Cutting  ” did  we  penetrate  low  enough  to  ascertain  the  base  level 
of  one  of  these  platforms;  it  was  found  to  be  1 1 .6  feet  below  datum  (PI.  VI,  I). 

The  tops  of  these  mud-brick  platforms  range  from  6.8  to  9.8  feet  above  datum,  an 
average  of  + 8.3  feet.  Their  construction  must  have  entailed  a considerable  expenditure 
of  energy  and  wealth,  for  there  is  reason  to  think  that  they  extended  over  most  of  the  site. 
Probably  all  its  inhabitants  gave  either  labour  or  money  to  ensure  the  safety  of  the  city 
against  the  menace  of  floods.  Even  so,  it  was  destroyed  yet  again  by  a flood  which  cut  great 
gaps  through  it  and  divided  it  into  three  separate  parts. 

In  face  of  the  formidable  task  of  elevating  their  city  above  flood-level,  the  people  of 
Harappa  II  Phase  fortunately  found  plenty  of  excellent  material  for  this  purpose  in  the 
plain  around;  indeed,  it  is  possible  that  the  ground  was  in  places  so  sodden  by  water  that 

^ The  average  level  of  H.  Ill  is  i.i  ft.  above  datum. 


37 


38 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


this  only  needed  to  be  shaped  for  conversion  into  bricks.  Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  separat- 
ing these  sun-dried  bricks  from  the  platforms  to  measure  them,  it  looks  as  if  a large 
proportion  were  not  really  dry  before  being  used,  so  that  they  had  become  compacted 
together.  The  few  bricks  that  we  could  extract  measured  1 1 14 x 514x2%  ins.,  ii%x5l4 
X3l4ins.,  I i%x6x  3 ins.,  and  1 214 x 6ki x 4 ins. 

The  burnt  bricks  used  for  the  houses  and  other  buildings  of  Harappa  II  occupation 
vary  little  in  size  from  those  made  in  the  following  period;  they  range  from  iol4  x 5%  x 2I4 
to  1 1 X 5I4  X 2%  inches.  The  most  usual  size  was  i ol4  x 5%  x 2%  inches.  All  were  well 
shaped  and  properly  fired.  The  larger  sized  bricks,  1 1 x 5I4  x 2%  inches,  were  only  sparingly 
used;  they  were  far  more  common  in  the  Harappa  I Period  above.'  A size  of  brick  very 
frequently  used  in  Sindh  to-day  is  1 1 % x 5%  x 2%  inches,  and  I am  told  that  bricks  of  this 
size  are  used  nowhere  else  in  India.  As  this  size  approximates  very  closely  that  of  the  larger 
bricks  of  the  Harappa  Period,  it  is  conceivable  that  long  ago,  when  the  sites  of  ancient  Sindh 
were  being  stripped  of  their  usable  bricks,  these  large  sized  bricks  were  copied  for  their 
convenience  of  size  and  shape. 

Though  so  much  of  the  masonry  of  Harappa  II  had  been  remo\"ed  by  brick  quarriers,® 
for  obvious  reasons  material  was  rarely  taken  from  the  pavements  of  bathrooms  and  privies 
or  from  the  drainage  systems  that  served  them.  The  survival  of  the  drains,  which  were 
always  carefully  built,  enabled  us  to  determine  the  lay-out  of  a street  even  when  the  walls 
of  the  houses  on  either  side  had  disappeared.  The  paved 'floors  of  other  rooms,  however, 
had  rarely  been  left  intact. 

The  brick  floors  of  privy  and  bathroom  were  customarily  laid  somewhat  above  the 
general  floor  level  of  the  house  to  accord  ease  of  drainage,  and  they  were  always  edged  all 
round  to  a height  of  2V2  to  3 inches  to  protect  the  bases  of  the  walls  from  moisture.  In  all 
cases,  the  privy  was  constructed  against  the  street  wall  of  the  house  to  be  as  close  as 
possible  to  a main  drain  (PI.  XX,  a,  f). 

Although  Chanhu-daro  was  a much  smaller  city  than  Mohenjo-daro  and  populated 
chiefly  by  artisans,  as  proved  by  the  plentiful  evidence  of  crafts  that  were  practised  there, 
its  drainage  system  was  as  well  thought  out  and  doubtless  quite  as  effective  as  that  of  the 
larger  city.  The  long  lines  of  the  drains  are  clearly  seen  in  the  lower  picture  of  Pi.  XV, 
which  also  illustrates  the  heavy  toll  of  bricks  that  had  been  taken  from  the  buildings  that 
once  lined  the  streets. 

On  reference  again  to  Pi.  IV  it  will  be  seen  that  the  principal  buildings  were  grouped 
about  a wide  thoroughfare  whose  direction  was  north-west  to  south-east.  Another  street,  at 
whose  width  we  can  only  guess,  crossed  this  thoroughfare  at  right  angles  (it  runs  diagonally 
through  Squares  7/C,  8/D,  8/E).  A lane  parallel  to  this  street  (see  Sq.  7/E)  was 
detected  only  because  of  the  32  feet  or  so  of  drain  that  ran  down  it.  A fourth  street  ran 
westwards  from  the  south-eastern  end  of  the  main  street  (Sqs.  9/D  and  lo/E)  and  then 
turned  at  right  angles  towards  the  north-west;  traces  of  the  covered  drain  in  this  street  are 
indicated  in  Sq.  9/E. 

- At  Mohenjo-daro  also,  the  bricks  tended  to  become  slightly  larger  towards  the  upper  levels. 

^ The  buildings  in  this  stratum  were  nothing  like  so  well  preserved  as  those  in  the  level  above. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


39 


The  arrangement  of  these  streets  shows  that  some  attention  had  been  paid  to  town- 
planning,  a feature  which  we  did  not  find  in  the  Harappa  I level  above.  Nor  did  we  find 
any  drainage  system  of  importance  in  the  latter  stratum.  A very  considerable  decline  in  the 
amenities  of  life  had  evidently  taken  place  in  the  interval  between  the  two  periods.  This 
decline  was  also  noted  in  the  uppermost  strata  at  Alohenjo-daro.  Allowances,  however, 
should  he  made  for  the  respective  size  and  standing  of  the  two  cities;  a poorer  and  less 
cultured  community  would  deteriorate  much  more  quickly  than  a richer  and  more 
educated  one. 

In  the  little  group  of  fragmentary  pavements  and  badlv  dilapidated  walls  in  Sq.  7/  C, 
room  238,  460  was  a probable  17  feet  8 inches  long  by  a certain  14  feet  8 inches  wide.  Its 
substantial  north-western  wall,  2 feet  3 inches  thick,  still  stood  one  foot  high.‘  In  it  were 
found  a steatite  seal  (3495,  Ph  LI,  17)  and  a bronze  or  copper  knife  (3496,  Pi.  LXXII,  4), 
also  a very  interesting  pottery  head  of  a figurine  (2427,  Pi.  LIII,  ii,  iia),  but  this  little 
piece  lay  a few  inches  above  the  foundations  of  the  walls.  North-west  of  this  room  was  a 
smaller  one  (240)  of  which  only  one  wall  remained.  Some  18  square  feet  of  pavement, 
whose  bricks  were  laid  on  their  flats,  show  this  room  to  have  been  a bathroom  or  privy; 
its  floor  sloped  to  the  north-east  for  the  water  to  flow  into  a small  brick  channel  of  which  only 
enough  remained  to  identify  its  use.^  This  floor  is  seen  in  the  middle  foreground  of  Pi. 
XXI,  a,  left  high  on  a foundation  of  debris.  At  its  north-eastern  edge  was  a large  storage 
jar  (3489,  Pi.  XXIV,  3)  with  its  top  slightly  below  the  level  of  the  pavement,  which  it  was 
perhaps  intended  to  drain.  Close  to  the  western  corner  two  seals  (3493,  Ph  LI,  12;  2389, 
Pi.  LII,  30)  were  unearthed  and  a large  jar  (3490,  PI.  XXIV,  9)  lay  just  where  its  owner 
had  left  it. 

A pavement  in  room  239,  four  courses  thick  and  at  the  level  -f-  9.7  feet,  drained  into 
a channel  in  the  street  outside,^  and  this  was  4 inches  wide  and  deep  and  covered  with 
bricks  laid  on  their  flats.'^  The  walls  of  room  237,  which  was  10  feet  8 inches  wide, 
averaged  2 feet  high,  their  base  level  being  + 8.8  feet.  In  the  rubbish  well  above  its  ruined 
walls  the  food-stand  dish  C3272,  Pi.  XXV,  28)  was  found  and  a little  to  the  northwest  a pot- 
tery figurine  (2257,  PI.  LIII,  8)  and  a model  dove  in  clay  (3204,  PI.  LVII,  ii)  were 
unearthed.  At  locus  loi  in  this  same  square  a remarkably  well  preser\'ed  toy  cart  of  bronze 
with  wheels  complete  and  a driver  holding  a goad  (2463,  Pi.  LVIII,  i,  la)  was  found  lying 
at  the  level  of  + 9.7  feet,  well  below  the  bases  of  the  walls  in  its  vicinity.  Close  to  this  was 
the  model  of  an  antelope  (2652)  illustrated  in  Pi.  LVI,  10  at  about  the  same  level. 

We  were  unable  to  ascertain  the  w'idth  of  the  street  south-west  of  the  rooms  described 
above,  owing  to  the  disappearance  of  the  walls.  At  locus  273  (7/D),  however,  the  street  was 
nearly  8 feet  wide. 

The  isolated  remains  of  walls  in  Square  8/C  were  of  little  interest,  being  too  thin 
for  buildings  of  any  importance,  and  our  restorations  are,  of  course,  only  conjectural. 

* The  base  of  this  wall  was  9.7  ft.  above  datum. 

® The  average  level  of  this  pavement  was  9.5  ft.  above  datum. 

®The  street  wall  was  16  ins.  thick  and  stood  some  4 ft.  high. 

’’  The  floor  of  this  drain  was  9.8  ft.  above  datum. 


40 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Tliese  remains  ranged  from  9 inches  to  2 feet  4 inches  in  height.®  Some  of  them  rested  on 
the  mud-brick  platform  shown  by  hatching  in  PI.  IV,  whose  average  level  was  + 9.8  feet, 
but  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  solid  platforms  like  these  could  really  have  been  intended 
to  support  such  insignificant  masonry.  In  all  probability  the  buildings  for  which  this  and 
other  similar  platforms  were  erected  had  been  pulled  down  for  the  sake  of  their  bricks  and 
later  on  unimportant  houses  were  built  in  their  place.®  The  little  pavement,  5 feet  8 inches 
each  way,  near  the  south-western  corner  of  the  platform,  was  9.8  feet  above  datum  and  built 
of  one  course  of  brick.  The  surrounding  walls  had  disappeared,  but  its  use  can  safely  be 
surmised  by  the  fact  that  it  had  been  left  untouched.  A large  pottery  jar  (2524)  with  its 
mouth  close  to,  and  practically  level  with,  the  pavement  had  perhaps  served  to  drain  it. 

The  little  patch  of  flooring  at  locus  442  in  Square  9/B  measured  44  inches  square 
and  sloped  towards  its  north-eastern  corner,  w'here  there  were  the  remains  of  a little  drain, 
5 inches  wide  by  2V2  inches  deep.^®  Close  by  was  a large  pottery  pan  (3209,  Pi.  XXIV,  2), 
which  was  possibly  a bath  and  w'as  at  the  same  level  as  the  floor.  Two  steatite  seals 
(3215,  3207,  Pi.  LI,  14,  22)  came  from  the  same  vicinity  and  near  the  same  level.  In  the 
open  space  north-west  of  this  ruined  house  several  finds  were  recorded.  Locus  289  at  the 
depth  +8.6  feet  provided  a large  storage  jar  (3491,  Pis.  XXIV,  6,  XXXV,  3)  and  a seal 
(3492,  Pi.  LII,  32).  Inside  room  231  w'as  a second  seal  (3485,  Pi.  LI,  1 1).  Room  109 
contained  the  pottery  animal  (2583)  seen  in  PI.  LVI,  i and  just  outside  it  was  a large  jar 
(2464)  at  the  level  +9.5  feet.  At  locus  295  a model  figure  of  a duck  in  pottery  (2892, 
Pi.  LVII,  3)  was  unearthed  and  not  far  from  here  came  an  unfinished  shell  dish  (4366,  PL 
XC,  9)  and  a sandstone  block  (3564,  Pi.  XCIII,  9),  the  grooves  on  which  show  that  it  had 
been  employed  for  bead  making.  Stone  drills  of  the  kind  used  in  bead  manufacture  (as 
Pi.  LXXXVI,  b,  8)  were  also  picked  up  here. 

Owing  to  the  close  proximity  of  the  edge  of  the  mound,  the  house  in  Square  8/B  had 
practically  disappeared.  But  there  still  remained  part  of  the  walls  of  a room  standing  as 
much  as  3 feet  high  in  places,  with  the  floor-level  8.6  feet  above  datum.  A small  assembly 
of  metal  objects  (2365,  a-q.  Pis.  LXVIII,  1-16,  LXXV,  i-io)  found  buried  at  the  level  + 9.5 
feet  at  locus  284,  included  several  unfinished  castings.  This  hoard  was  clearly  the  property 
of  a metal-worker  and  is  shown  as  in  situ  in  PI.  LXXV,  i . Close  to  this  group  was  a clay 
model  of  a duck  (2396,  Pi.  LVII,  2)  and  a pottery  figurine  C3347,  PL  LIII,  12).  At  locus 
235  near  by,  a seal  was  found  (2390,  PL  LII,  6)  at  the  depth  of  + 9.9  feet. 

Of  the  various  buildings  that  line  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  main  street,  mostly  in 
Square  9/C,  that  one  marked  179,  190,  207,  208  was  very  dilapidated.  Part  of  the  south- 
eastern end  of  the  narrow  room  179  (extreme  left  of  PL  XXI,  f)  stood  only  8 inches  high,” 
though  the  walls  were  as  much  as  2 feet  3 inches  thick.  Though  one  wall  had  gone,  room 

® Their  foundation  levels  averaged  +10.2  ft.  and  they  were  built  of  bricks  loVix  5%  x 2li  ins. 
in  size. 

® The  same  wholesale  clearance  of  building  material  occurred  at  Mohenjo-daro,  where  we  found 
the  impressions  against  the  sides  of  these  platforms  of  the  brickwork  that  formerly  encased  them. 

This  was  6.7  ft.  above  datum. 

Its  base  was  9.1  ft.  above  datum. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


41 


207  had  clearly  been  9 feet  10  inches  long  by  6 feet  wide.  The  remaining  walls  still  stood 
18  inches  high.^^ 

The  wide  doorway  leading  from  the  north-east  into  190  suggests  that,  small  as  it  was, 
this  was  once  a courtyard.  A number  of  unfinished  disc-shaped  steatite  beads  (No.  2301), 
similar  to  those  illustrated  in  Pi.  LXXXIII,  36-39,  lay  on  the  floor  of  this  court  at  the  level 
+ 10.4  feet.  Outside  the  22  inch-thick  north-eastern  wall  of  this  court  at  locus  212  was 
a pavement,  3 feet  8 inches  square,  with  the  usual  edging  of  brick  around  it  standing  some 
xVi  inches  highty^  and  two  pottery  drain-pipes  (1991,  Pis.  XVI,  e,  LXXXVIII,  14,  1 5) 
found  in  the  close  vicinity  possibly  once  drained  this  little  bath  or  privy.  Just  north-east  of 
this  pavement  and  about  a foot  lower,  we  came  upon  a group  of  copper  and  bronze  tools  and 
utensils  (2593,  Pis.  LXIV,  i-i  i,  LXV,  1-9,  LXVI,  1-5,  LXXIV,  10-17),  including  a casting, 
all  so  corroded  together  as  to  be  inseparable  until  they  had  been  chemically  cleaned.  The 
fine  clay  figure  of  a rhinoceros  (2701)  in  Pi.  LVI,  8 also  came  from  the  same  spot,  but 
another  foot  higher.  Near  by,  at  locus  213,  another  hoard  of  metal  objects  (2360,  a-g,  Pi. 
LXVII,  13-19)  had  been  buried  at  the  level  + 10.4  feet,  and  a bronze  model  cart  (2291, 
PI.  LVIII,  2),  together  with  the  dish  of  a food-stand  (2815,  Pi.  XXV,  3),  was  found  at  the 
same  level.  The  toy  cart  was  not  so  well  preserved  as  the  specimen  found  in  Square  7/C, 
but  is  valuable  for  being  of  a different  type. 

A large  storage  jar  (3323,  PL  XXIV,  i)  was  unearthed  at  the  level  + 7.2  feet  at  locus 
296,  and  an  axe  and  a knife  near  by,  of  either  copper  or  bronze  (2382,  Pi.  LXVII,  20,  21), 
lay  at  about  the  same  level  as  the  hoard  described  above.  A seal  (2559)  illustrated  in 
PI.  LII,  20  was  also  found  at  locus  296,  about  2 feet  above  the  jar  that  was  also 
unearthed  there. 

The  long,  thin  wall  29 1 , 294  must  have  had  some  special  purpose.  It  was  only  three 
bricks  high,  but  at  its  north-western  end  there  w'as  the  lower  part  of  a blocked-up  doorway, 
2 feet  3 inches  wide,“  with  an  earthern  sill.  Beside  this  wall  there  were  a number  of  finds. 
At  locus  291,  a pottery  kohl-jar  (3484,  PI.  XXVII,  92)  and  a copper  knife  (3486,  PI. 
LXXII,  i)  lay  on  the  mud-brick  platform  here  at  the  level  -f  7.1  feet.  A shell  cone  (3533, 
Pi.  LX,  31)  was  recovered  at  locus  208,  and  near  locus  292  some  flint  drills  (3457, 3526), 
like  those  illustrated  in  PI.  LXXXVI,b,  8,  lay  at  the  level  + 7.0  feet.  The  finely  painted 
jar  (3011)  shown  in  Pis.  XXIII,  6 and  XXXIX,  23  was  unearthed  just  west  of  locus  208 
at  the  level  + 9.6  feet  and  formed  a group  with  two  less  important  pieces. 

In  this  vicinity  also,  these  ruined  walls  stood  on  part  of  an  extensive  mud-brick  plat- 
form, whose  average  level  was  9.2  feet  above  datum. 

Bead  Factory  with  Furnace 

Larther  along  the  main  street  towards  the  north-west  (Square  9/D)  was  a remarkable 
building  (215,  286,  287,  Pi.  VIII)  with  several  unusual  features. 

The  main  portion  of  this  very  intriguing  building  is  some  33  feet  long  by  12  feet  6 

Their  base  level  averaged  9 ft.  above  datum. 

At  the  level  -j-  10.2  ft.  This  floor  was  constructed  of  two  courses  of  brick. 

Its  base  was  at  -{-9.1  ft. 


42 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


inches  in  width  on  the  outside;  the  varjdng  thickness  of  its  walls  shows  that  they  had  been 
reconstructed. 

The  small  and  very  carefully  huilt  room  215,  9 feet  2 inches  long  by  7 feet  wide,  was 
entered  from  the  east  by  a doorway,  3 feet  3 inches  wide  on  the  outside,  whose  well 
rabbeted  jambs  show  that  it  was  once  closed  on  the  inside  by  a substantial  door.^^  A second 
doorway,  4 feet  7 inches  wide  (Pi.  XX,  d,  foreground)  on  the  opposite  side,  had  been  altered 
considerably.  The  original  sill  was  6.6  feet  above  datum  and  the  door  it  served  had  been 
blocked  up  leaving  at  its  north-western  side  a narrow  aperture,  2 inches  wide,  which  served 
for  the  drainage  of  water  into  the  lower  jar  seen  in  Pi.  XVII,  i.  Later,  as  the  ground  level 
rose,  this  aperture  was  filled  up  some  2 feet  from  the  sill,  and  to  catch  the  drainage  another 
jar  was  placed  on  top  of  the  first. 

From  the  north-western  side  of  room  215  (PL  XX,  d)  a series  of  well-built  flues, 
averaging  5!^  inches  wide  by  8 inches  high,  ran  to  the  other  end  of  the  building  where  they 
had  been  destroyed.  Five  of  these  flues  have  survived,  and  there  may  have  been  two  or 
three  more.  That  three  other  flues  at  right  angles  communicated  with  them  had  been 
revealed  by  the  removal  of  bricks  from  here  in  ancient  times.  PI.  XX,  c,  shows  two  of  these 
cross-flues  clearly. 

The  flues  were  covered  by  a single  course  of  bricks  and  on  this  pavement  there  were 
three  compartments  (Pi.  VIII)  of  varying  size  with  walls  only  half-a-hrick  thick,  and 
standing  some  18  inches  high.  These  compartments  may  once  have  had  doorways  on  their 
south-western  sides,  whose  jambs  were  demolished  later  by  brick  robbers.  Along  the  other 
side  was  a passage  (286),  which  narrowed  from  2 feet  3 inches  to  i foot  1 1 inches  in  width 
at  the  other  end,  where  two  broad,  shallow  steps,  each  3 inches  high,  led  to  a pavement 
(287)  at  the  north-western  end  of  the  building.^® 

As  is  seen  in  PI.  XX,  d,  the  two  courses  of  brick  below  the  line  of  flues  rested  on  a 
thick  layer  of  debris  at  the  average  level  of  9 feet  above  datum,"  which  is  also  the  foundation 
level  of  some  of  the  walls. 

The  thinness  of  the  walls  of  the  compartments  above  the  flues  together  with  their 
small  size  precludes  the  possibility  of  this  building  having  been  a hammam,  or  sweat-house. 
Moreover,  the  absence  of  any  signs  of  a great  temperature  in  the  flues  is  strong  evidence 
that  the  heat  used  was  very  moderate.  There  was  no  ash  anywhere  in  the  flues  and  the  heat 
can  hardly  have  come  from  room  215,  where  there  was  no  trace  of  a furnace.  The  purpose 
of  this  building  is  an  interesting  problem.  A possible  clue  to  its  use  is  presented  by  the 
number  of  beads,  many  unfinished,  that  lay  scattered  about  on  the  earthern  floor  of  room 
215."  Among  them  was  a concreted  mass  of  minute  steatite  beads  (2391,  B,  Pi.  XCIII,  5). 
It  had  evidently  been  intended  to  glaze  these,  and  this  curious  arrangement  might  have 
been  built  for  this  purpose  and  then  never  used.  Among  the  beads  found  in  room  215 

Its  sill  was  10.3  ft.  above  datum  and  its  jambs  stood  some  2 ft.  high. 

Its  level  is  10.7  ft.  above  datum  and  that  of  the  south-eastern  end  of  the  passage  9.6  ft. 
above  datum. 

The  level  is  averaged  because  there  had  been  a subsidence  of  the  middle  of  the  building. 

At  the  level  -f-  9.3  ft. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


43 


there  were  a number  of  copper  tools  (2384,  a-f,  Pi.  LXIII,  12-14,  LXXYI,  14),  three  copper 
or  bronze  knives  (2290,  a-c,  Pis.  LXIX,  i,  2,  LXXVI,  7),  a copper  pin  (2294,  Pi.  LXIX,  7), 
a seal  (2285,  PL  LI,  15),  a flake  drill  (2326,  PI.  XCIII,  6),  a faience  gamesman  (2326,  i. 
Pi.  LX,  7),  a queer  shell  object  (2326,  k.  Pi.  XC,  18),  and  some  carnelian  nodules  (2326,  u, 
PI.  XCIII,  17-20).  All  these  were  found  at  the  level  of  + 10.4  feet.  About  a foot  lower 
and  in  the  same  room  was  a shell  feeding  cup  (2408,  Pi.  XC,  2),  the  copper  canister 
(2449)  seen  in  PI.  LXXV,  15,  a shell  cone  (2401,  Pi.  LX,  36),  and  the  flint  core  (3012) 
which  had  been  used  as  a rubber  and  is  illustrated  in  Pi.  XCIII,  28.  Two  large  shells 
(2991),  one  of  which  is  shown  in  Pi.  XC,  i,  appear  to  indicate  that  shell  working  was  also 
practised  in  this  workshop. 

On  the  floor  of  the  passage  286  was  a brown  steatite  seal  (2428,  PI.  LII,  19)  which, 
from  its  colour,  was  apparently  unfinished. 

The  courtyard  297  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  this  building  may  one  day  supply  the 
clue  to  the  source  of  the  heat  conducted  or  intended  to  be  conducted  through  the  flues;  for 
it  appears  to  have  communicated  with  the  interior  of  the  building  by  an  opening  just  under 
2 feet  wide  that  was  blocked  up  at  some  later  date.”  The  very  wide  entrance  into  this 
courtyard  could  easily  have  admitted  carts  and  pack-animals  with  supplies  of  fuel. 

In  this  courtyard  some  most  interesting  and  illuminating  finds  were  made.  In  the 
middle  of  its  wide  entrance,  a large  pottery  jar  (2528,  Pi.  XXVII,  53)  was  found  set  in  the 
ground  at  the  level  + 10.  i feet  with  its  rim  w'ell  below  the  foundations  of  the  walls.  A large 
pan  (2596,  PI.  XXIX,  37)  in  the  north-eastern  corner  contained  a number  of  copper  and 
bronze  tools,  an  ingot  of  bronze,  and  bangles  and  razors  (2596,  Pis.  LXYII,  1-12,  LXXIII, 
29,  LXXIV,  I , LXXVI,  1 9),  all  of  them  products  of  the  metal-worker’s  craft.  The  top  of  this 
pan  was  well  below  the  base  of  the  adjacent  door-jamb  and  it  seems  to  have  been  buried 
here  for  safety.  A very  miscellaneous  assortment  of  most  interesting  material  (2529,  a-z; 
aa-jj.  Pis.  LXII,  1-23,  LXIII,  1-5,  LXXIV,  2-9)  lay  spread  over  the  floor  of  the  court  at  the 
average  level  + 10.4  feet,  and  it  looks  as  if  the  occupants  of  this  unique  building  had  had 
to  leave  the  place  hurriedly  and  had  never  returned.  These  objects  include  a seal  (2529, 
cc,  PI.  LII,  23)  and  an  unfinished  carved  shell  ball  (2556,  PI.  LIX,  14).  A copper  chisel 
(2575,  Pi.  LXX,  15)  also  came  from  here  and  from  the  same  level. 

On  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  court  at  locus  227,  more  copper  was  unearthed  at  the 
level  -T  1 1.3  feet  (2199,  a-o.  Pis.  LXVI,  6-21,  LXXV,  n-13).  But  this  hoard  may  have 
been  buried  here  by  someone  in  the  occupation  mentioned  above.  Beneath  this  was 
another  collection  of  copper  and  bronze  (2525,  a-g,  Pi.  LXIII,  6-1 1 ) at  the  level  -f  9.4  feet. 
The  pottery  figurine  (2527)  seen  in  PI.  Till,  13  lay  near  by,  together  with  a seal  (2361,  PI. 
LI,  32),  a copper  razor  (2359,  Pis.  LXXIII,  33,  LXXVI,  33),  and  a copper  knife  (2523,  a. 
Pi.  LXXII,  2).  Close  by,  at  locus  228,  a fine  elephant  seal  (2594,  h),  shown  in  Pi.  LI,  20, 
was  unearthed  and  an  interesting  assortment  of  metal  objects,  together  with  miniature 
pottery  (2594,  a-p.  Pis.  XXVIII,  38-41,  LXXVI,  29-31),  all  at  the  level  +9.9  feet.  Lrom 
this  place  there  also  came  a stone  mace-head  (2693,  Pi.  XCIII,  33)  and  an  unfinished  shell 
dish  (2624,  a.  Pi.  XC,  10).  With  these  lay  the  strange-looking  shell  object  (2379)  illus- 

The  sill  of  this  aperture  (+  9.1  ft.)  is  16  ins.  below  the  floor  level  of  the  passage  286. 


44 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


trated  in  PL  XC,  i6,  whose  use  we  do  not  know.  At  locus  263  we  found  a copper  razor 
(3044)  of  the  type  shown  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  25  and  also  a copper  axe  (2296,  PL  LXXI,  6), 
which  may  have  been  dropped  by  one  of  the  occupants  of  this  building  at  the  time  of 
leaving  it. 

Just  outside  the  north-eastern  entrance  to  room  215,  a stone  hone  of  animal  shape 
(2364),  like  that  in  PL  XCIII,  1 1,  had  been  left. 

If  the  excavation  of  Chanhu-daro  is  one  day  resumed,  the  upper  part  of  this  ver)' 
curious  building  should  be  removed  in  order  to  ascertain  exactly  how  it  was  used,  and 
whether  it  was  for  the  purpose  that  we  have  surmised,  though  the  unhnished  heads  found 
both  in  room  2 1 5 and  the  courtyard  297  leave  little  doubt  of  that. 

This  heating  system  is  in  no  way  comparable  with  the  possible  hypocaust  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro.  The  latter  was  quite  different  in  design  and  its  decoration  alone  proved 
that  it  was  for  man’s  own  use."“ 

Room  183  (Square  8/D),  which  was  only  8 feet  9 inches  long  by  7 feet,  3 inches 
wide  (PL  XX,  e,  foreground),  was  entered  from  the  street  by  a doorway,  4 feet  wide,  that 
was  blocked  up  at  a later  date.  This  entrance  had  two  sills,  the  upper  one  at  the  level 
+ 9.6  feet,  and  the  other  7 inches  lower,  with  a single  course  of  mud-brick  and  one  of  burnt 
brick  between  the  two.  A second  doonvay  with  its  sill  a little  higher  up  than  the  upper  one 
of  the  street  entrance  opened  from  this  small  room  to  the  courtyard  297  (PL  XX,  e, 
left-hand  side).  This  doorway  appears  to  have  been  about  4 feet  8 inches  wide.  On  the 
present  evidence,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  this  room  was  occupied  by  the  man  in  charge 
of  what  appears  to  have  been  a factory  for  beads  and  seals. 

Room  196  was  separated  from  room  183  by  a partition  wall  only  half  a brick  thick, 
and  it  looks  as  though  the  two  were  originally  one  large  room.  Save  where  a rectangular 
bin,  4 feet  square  inside,'^  had  been  built  against  this  unbonded  partition  wall,  room  196 
was  paved  with  two  courses  of  bricks  sloping  gently  towards  the  south-east  corner.^^  This 
room  had  two  doorways,  one  to  the  street  and  the  other  at  its  further  end  opening  into 
room  310,  whose  walls  were  in  a ruinous  condition  and  nowhere  over  a foot  high.“  This 
latter  doorway  was  originally  some  4 feet  wide,  but  it  was  subsequently  narrowed  to  15 
inches  and  perhaps  then  served  as  a cupboard  niche.^^  The  street  doorway  was  4 feet  6 
inches  wide  and  its  sill  at  the  level  +8.5  feet. 

Unfortunately,  nothing  was  found  in  this  fine,  large  room  to  provide  a clue  to  its  use. 
The  pottery  elephant  (3483)  seen  in  PL  LVI,  9,  which  lay  on  the  paved  floor,  was  probably 
a treasured  toy  of  a child  who  lived  in  this  part  of  the  building. 

Rooms  138,  310,  31 1 could  only  be  conjecturally  restored,  but  the  walls  of  the  better 
preserved  room  178,  which  was  15  feet  long  by  an  average  of  5 feet  8 inches  wide,  still 
stood  from  7 inches  to  14  inches  in  height."'*  No.  310  contained  a jar-stopper  made  in 

Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  p.  237,  pi.  LXIX,  b. 

About  I ft.  high,  with  its  floor  at  the  level  -f-  9.8  ft. 

-j-  9.5  ft.  above  datum. 

Their  foundations  stood  at  the  level  -{-9.1  ft. 

Its  sill  was  9.6  ft.  above  datum. 

Their  foundations  were  at  the  level  9.0  ft. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


45 


shell  (2626),  which  is  pictured  on  PI.  LXXXIX,  13.  In  room  178  were  two  bird-whistles 
(2822-3)  of  the  kind  shown  in  Pi.  LIX,  5, 6,  a seal  (253 1 , PI.  LII,  1 5),  and  a pottery  animal 
(2658,  PI.  LVI,  2),  which  lend  support  to  the  suggestion  that  this  part  of  the  building  was 
a dwelling  house. 

PI.  XXI,  b shows  the  little  room  203  across  the  side  street  which  passed  beside  the 
factory.  This  room  was  7 feet  4 inches  wide  and  its  probable  length  9 feet  or  so.  The 
smaller  apartment  adjoining  it  was  probably  entered  from  the  north-east,  but  brick-robbing 
has  made  this  uncertain."®  A small,  badly  preserved  cess  pit  connected  this  little  room  with 
a drain  in  this  side  street,  whose  channel  (Pi.  XXI,  b)  here  was  9.7  feet  above  datum.  At 
locus  274  a pottery  bulla  (2633),  seen  in  PI.  LXXXVIII,  i , was  lying  at  the  level  -f  9.6  feet. 

As  the  plan  in  PI.  IV  shows,  the  main  street  was  irregular  in  width  and  its  alignment 
far  from  straight.  Near  locus  197  (Square  8/D)  it  was  only  1 5 feet  6 inches  wide;  a view 
of  this  end  is  seen  in  PI.  XXI,  e,  whereas  Pi.  XXI,  f shows  its  widest  part,  18  feet  8 inches, 
at  locus  193.  The  objects  found  in  this  street  included,  at  locus  21 1,  a poorly  preserved 
seal  (3051,  Pi.  LI,  24)  at  the  level  + 8.1  feet;  at  locus  341,  a dish  with  two  compartments 
(4140,  PI.  XXXIX,  17);  at  locus  209,  two  storage  jars  (3212  and  another)  shown  in  position 
in  PI.  XVII,  i,  both  used  as  cess  pits.  Between  loci  209  and  447  lay  a seal  (3206,  Pi.  LII, 
1 1).  Close  to  the  drain  at  locus  130  was  a sandstone  block  (3634),  used  in  shaping  beads. 
At  locus  290  in  Square  8/D,  a copper  jar-cover  (2522,  Pi.  LXXIII,  36)  lay  between  the 
drain  and  the  house  wall  at  the  level  + 9.8  feet.  Locus  84  contained  the  large  storage 
jar  (2598)  illustrated  in  PI.  XVII,  b,  with  its  rim  level  with  the  sill  of  the  ver)^  wide  doorway 
leading  into  room  196.  An  unfinished  shell  dish  (2973,  Pi.  XC,  3)  was  taken  from  locus 
197  at  the  level  +8.9  feet  and  a copper  fish-hook  (2542)  from  locus  108  at  about  a 
foot  higher. 

As  was  usual  in  the  ancient  cities  of  the  Harappa  Period,  most  of  the  buildings  on 
either  side  of  this  street  were  served  by  very  efficient  street  drains.  But  for  some  reason  or 
other  not  all  the  houses  were  connected  with  them.  Of  the  bead  factory  only  room  215  was 
drained— and  then  into  the  two  large  cess  jars  already  mentioned  (PI.  XVII,  i). 

On  both  sides  of  the  main  street,  the  direction  of  flow  was  to  the  south-east.  The 
drain  which  passes  two  sides  of  the  house  attached  to  the  factor)^  commences  near  locus 
314  (Square  7/C),  some  60  feet  or  so  along  the  side  street,  receiving  the  outfall  of  houses 
on  either  side  which  had  practically  disappeared.  The  floor  of  the  channel  at  locus  314 
was  9.7  feet  above  datum,  and  5 inches  lower  where  it  turned  into  the  main  street  (PI. 
XXI,  e).  After  passing  some  distance  down  the  street,  this  drain  received  a tributary  from 
the  well  paved  room  196;"^  the  junction  is  seen,  partly  excavated,  in  Pi.  XVIII,  d.  A 
large  jar  (2598,  Pi.  XVII,  b)  was  unearthed  beside  this  tributar)^  at  locus  84.  At  this  point 
of  junction  (locus  223),  the  drain  and  its  tributary  turn  across  the  main  street  to  enter  the 
long  sewer  on  its  other  side  (Pi.  XX,  e,  extreme  right-hand  side). 

The  long  sewer  on  the  other  side  of  the  main  street  also  began  in  the  narrower  street 
at  right  angles,  at  locus  87  in  Square  8/E,  where  its  broken  end  rested  on  a large  pottery 

26  The  walls  stood  about  2 ft.  high  with  their  bases  at  + 9.5  ft. 

22  Its  level  here  was  8.9  ft.  above  datum. 


46 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


jar  (3047,  Pis.  XVII,  a,  XXIV,  5).“®  It  turned  at  right  angles  into  the  main  street  at  locus 
108,^^  and  sloping  gently  passed  down  the  further  end  of  the  street  to  locus  341,  where  we 
could  find  no  further  trace  of  it.^“  In  all,  this  sewer  had  a fall  of  1 7 inches  in  about  148  feet. 
It  is  seen  not  fully  excavated  in  Pi.  XVIII,  a,  f. 

Towards  its  end  an  important  tributary  from  another  side  street  enters  the  long  main 
sewer  at  locus  21 1 (Pi.  XIX,  e).^”^  This  branch  apparently  originated  from  a house  at  locus 
218  (Square  lo/E).  Curiously  enough  the  declination  of  this  branch  drain  is  towards  the 
north-east,  but  this  is  entirely  due  to  a subsidence,  as  the  photograph  in  Pi.  XXI,  d clearly 
shows.  A finely  painted  jar  (4656,  Pi.  XXXV,  4)  was  found  at  locus  195  at  the  level 
+ 7.0  feet. 

The  channels  of  this  very  extensive  and  well  planned  drainage  system  range  from 
4I4  to  5I4  inches  wide  and  deep  in  the  side  streets;  in  the  main  street  they  are  'jVz  inches 
deep.  As  is  seen  in  Pis.  XVIII,  d,  f,  XIX,  e and  XX,  f,  the  channel  was  always  covered  with 
bricks  laid  on  their  flats,  these  bricks  being  exactly  the  same  in  size  and  shape  as  those 
used  for  the  houses. 

Great  care  was  exercised  in  laying  these  drains.  The  inner  angle  of  one  of  the  turns 
at  locus  223  (Square  8/D)  was  carefully  rounded  off  to  impede  the  flow  of  sewage  as  little 
as  possible.  The  same  had  been  done  at  the  junction  at  locus  21 1 (Square  9/D),  where 
one  of  the  rounded  bricks  is  seen  in  the  centre  of  the  photograph  PI.  XIX,  e. 

VVe  were  able  to  detect  various  places  along  these  drains  where  the  covering  bricks 
had  been  lifted  off  in  order  to  remove  stoppages,  and  many  of  these  bricks  were  not  put 
back  as  carefully  as  they  might  have  been. 

Despite  the  better  preservation  of  the  buildings  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  main 
street  from  the  bead  factory,  we  were  frequently  in  doubt  as  to  the  ground  plans  of  the 
rooms.  The  inner  rooms  136, 139,  264  of  the  large  house  in  Square  9/D  were  very  dilapi- 
dated, and  only  the  south-western  and  south-eastern  walls  of  the  house  remained.  The 
latter,  which  was  2 feet  thick  and  still  stood  3 feet  high,  is  seen  in  Pi.  XXI,  d.®'^  The 
south-western  wall  was  of  about  the  same  height,  but,  curiously  enough,  its  foundations 
were  about  a foot  higher. 

The  small  room  174,  which  was  7 feet  7 inches  long  by  3 feet  2 inches  wide,  may 
possibly  have  been  a little  workshop,  for  many  unfinished  beads  were  found  there  at 
the  level  +6.8  feet  and  also  a seal  (2297,  PI.  LI,  29)  at  a slightly  lower  level.  This  room 
must  have  been  entered  from  the  north-west,  but  owing  to  the  removal  of  bricks  from  the 
wall,  all  traces  of  an  entry  had  been  lost.  In  room  264  was  the  fish-hook  (2943)  seen  in 
PI.  LXXIII,  5;  and  a multiple  pottery  bracelet  (3002,  Pi.  XC,  34)  comes  from  room  139. 
In  the  street  outside  to  the  south  a pottery  figurine  (2039,  PI.  LIII,  i)  was  lying  with  a 
pottery  drain-pipe  (2292,  Pi.  XC,  33). 

The  base  of  its  channel  here  was  + 9.9  ft. 

Here  its  level  was  -/  9.3  ft. 

At  this  point  it  was  8.2  ft.  above  datum. 

At  locus  218  its  level  now  is  + 6.7  ft.  At  locus  21 1 it  was  the  same  level  as  the  street  drain 
here,  namely,  -j-  8.2  ft. 

Its  base  was  8.6  ft.  above  datum. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


47 


Room  95,  which  was  a little  over  14  feet  long  by  10  feet  wide,  appears  to  have 
been  an  annex  to  this  house,  despite  the  double  wall  between.  On  the  inside  of  the 
street  wall  was  an  exceptionally  well  preserved  ablution  place  or  privy,  with  a floor  4 feet 
I inch  by  3 feet  i inch  in  size,  constructed  of  three  courses  of  brick,  of  which  the  upper 
one  was  9.6  feet  above  datum.  As  is  seen  in  PI.  XX,  f,  this  pavement  was  surrounded  by  the 
usual  skirting  of  brick,  though  in  this  case  the  bricks  were  set  on  their  longer  edges  instead 
of  on  their  ends.  The  walls  that  had  enclosed  this  pavement  had  all  been  removed  for  the 
sake  of  their  bricks.  The  water  from  this  convenience  ran  out,  as  the  photograph  shows, 
through  an  aperture  in  the  base  of  the  street  wall,  which  here  was  19  inches  thick,  and 
then  through  a short  channel  into  the  street  drain.  This  arrangement  is  seen  from  another 
view-point  in  the  right-hand  bottom  corner  of  Pi.  XVIII,  f.  A footing,  projecting  from  the 
base  of  the  street  wall  and  apparent  on  the  inside  only  showed  that  the  wall  had  been  built 
up  on  an  earlier  and  wider  one.^^ 

In  a later  wall  at  the  back  of  this  room,  which  still  stood  some  17  inches  high,  the 
bricks  had  been  laid  in  an  unusual  manner  (PI.  XX,  f).  The  foundations  of  this  wall 
(+  9.8  feet)  were  2 feet  higher  than  those  of  room  95,  hut  the  bricks  used  for  both  the 
room  and  the  later  wall  were  exactly  the  same  size,  1 6¥\  x 5 x zVi  inches. 

Room  95  could  be  entered  from  the  small  courtyard  82  by  a doorway  3 feet  4 inches 
wide.^*  Though  small,  82  must  have  been  either  a courtyard  or  a blind  alley;  there  was  no 
trace  of  a wall  on  its  south-western  side.  The  side  walls  of  a brick  bin  in  this  court  or  alley, 
do  not  meet  the  wall  behind,  and  we  must  presume  that  it  was  a stall  for  fodder  rather  than 
a grain  bin.  A fine  seal  (2462,  Pi.  LI,  33)  was  found  here  at  the  level  +9.5  feet. 

Room  176,217  (PI.  XX,  e),  in  the  house  next  door,  was  14  feet  8 inches  long.  In 
its  south-eastern  corner  a well  preserved  ablution  place  had  the  usual  skirting  of  bricks 
standing  4 inches  above  its  pavement,”  the  water  from  which  ran  out  through  the  street 
wall  and  then  through  a short  channel  into  the  main  drain.  The  level  of  a footing  4 inches 
wide,  on  the  inside  of  the  street  wall,  was  8.5  feet  above  datum.”  This  room  was  entered 
from  the  north-west  by  a doorway,  4 feet  4 inches  wide,  which  at  some  later  date  was 
narrowed  to  2 feet  6 inches  wide  by  the  addition  of  a new  jamb  on  its  northern  side. 
Subsequently,  this  opening  was  entirely  blocked  up.^^' 

Little  more  than  the  outline  of  room  425  remained,  with  the  foundations  of  the 
south-western  corner  7.7  feet  above  datum. 

A narrow  lane,  averaging  3 feet  i o inches  wide,  ran  behind  these  two  houses,  parallel 
with  the  main  street;  the  south-eastern  end  of  this  lane  is  seen  in  PI.  XXI,  d.  Unfortunately, 
most  of  the  house  or  houses  on  the  other  side  of  this  lane  had  been  demolished  by  brick- 
robbers.  Only  three  walls  of  room  137  remain,  averaging  only  i foot  high;”  the  small 

This  footing  was  at  4-  and  its  base  at  4-  8.2  ft. 

The  sill  of  this  was  9.8  ft.  above  datum. 

At  the  level  -f-  9.1  ft. 

The  street  wall  here  was  3 ft.  high. 

Its  sill  was  7.9  ft.  above  datum,  and  the  new  jamb  stood  2 ft.  high. 

Their  bases  were  at  + 8.1  ft. 


48 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


aperture,  i foot  8 inches  wide,  in  the  south-eastern  wall  is  far  too  narrow  to  have  been  a 
doorway.  In  this  room  a spear-head  (2602,  Pi.  LXXI,  12)  was  found  at  the  level  +8.3 
feet  and  the  open  space  at  locus  171  contained  a copper  platter  (2844,  Pi.  LXXIII,  35) 
and  a bronze  adze  (2843,  PI.  LXXI,  9)  at  the  level  + 7.7  feet.  The  interesting  vase 
inscribed  in  black  paint  (3419)  and  shown  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  24  came  also  from  this  place. 
At  locus  224  beyond,  there  was  a faience  jar  (2936,  PL  LXXXIX,  2),  and  locus  172 
yielded  an  unfinished  weight  (2380)  at  the  level  + 9.4  feet.  This  last  object,  together 
with  some  stone  drills  found  at  locus  253  on  the  other  side  of  Square  9/E,  suggests  that 
lapidaries  once  occupied  the  houses  on  this  part  of  the  site.  Some  paste  plaques  and 
cylinders  were  present  in  a stratum  of  ashes  and  dark-coloured  soil  near  locus  171.®“* 

Very  little  was  left  of  room  132  except  for  a privy  that  averaged  4 feet  long  by 
2 feet  10  inches  wide  and  was  roughly  built  of  two  courses  of  brick.^'*  An  outfall,  2/t  inches 
wide,  led  to  the  street  drain  in  the  lane  outside.^^ 

Two  isolated  houses  on  the  edge  of  the  mound  beyond  (Sq.  lo/E)  had  almost  dis- 
appeared. In  room  252,261  of  the  further  one  a steatite  seal  (2293,  Pi.  LI,  28)  was 
found.  Room  218  in  the  nearer  house  was  better  preserved  and  its  2 foot-thick  south- 
western wall  stood  in  places  i foot  6 inches  high.*'  One  jamb  of  the  doorway  in  the  north- 
western wall  was  missing,  but  the  sill  was  still  well  defined.*^  From  just  outside  this 
doorw'ay  came  a steatite  seal  (2426,  PI.  LII,  14)  from  the  level  -F  9.0  feet. 

Between  these  two  houses  was  a fire-place,  whose  walls,  half-a-hrick  thick,  stood 
I foot  6 inches  high,  and  near  by,  at  locus  251,  a painted  jar  of  the  Jhukar  Period  (3182,  PI. 
XLI,  38),  which  had  rolled  down  the  side  of  the  mound,  was  found  in  close  proximity  at  the 
level  + 7.2  feet.  South  of  locus  250  we  also  came  upon  a large  painted  sherd  (3671,  PI. 
XXXVI,  23)  at  the  depth  of  + 6.8  feet.  This  sherd  is  especially  noteworthy  because  it 
is  painted  in  polychrome,  a technique  that  was  rarely  used  in  the  pottery  of  the  Harappa 
Culture.  At  locus  225  a second  article  of  Jhukar  workmanship  was  recovered,  namely,  a 
pottery  bead-amulet  (2289,  Pi.  L,  1 5)  which  lay  at  the  higher  level  of  + 10.3  feet. 

Locus  181,  near  the  middle  of  Square  9/E,  revealed  a remnant  of  a drainage  channel, 
5 inches  wide  and  deep,**  probably  part  of  a sewer  that  ran  down  a once  existing  lane.  A 
small  tributary  leading  to  this  drained  a privy  that  stood  some  10  inches  higher  than  the 
drain  itself.  The  pavement  here  was  5 feet  long  by  3 feet  6 inches  wide,  constructed  of  tw'o 
courses  of  brick  but  without  the  usual  edging  of  brick  around  it.  Tbe  short  channel  that 
drained  this  floor  was  partly  supported  on  a large  jar  (Pi.  XVI,  c),  which  may  have  received 
the  outfall  before  the  sewer  was  laid  in  the  lane.  Near  by  and  at  about  the  same  level, 
several  unfinished  shell  bangles  were  found  (2871,  PI.  XC,  1 5),  and  at  locus  219  a faience 

These  lay  at  the  level  -}-  6.8  ft.  See  PI.  XCI,  12,  13,  20-22,  for  some  of  these  curious  objects. 

At  the  level  10.4  ft.  Some  of  the  bricks  in  this  pavement  had  been  sawn. 

The  walls  here  were  only  a foot  high  with  their  bases  at  8.i  ft. 

Its  foundations  were  at  -f  8.6  ft.  and  stood  on  mud-brick,  which  was  probably  part  of  the 
platform  north-east  of  it. 

This  sill  was  -j-  9.0  ft. 

**  At  the  level  -j-  8.2  ft. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


49 


amulet  (2604,  PL  XLIX,  2)  of  Jhukar  make.  This  last  was  certainly  an  intrusion,  lying  as  it 
did  at  the  level  +9.6  feet.  Locus  201  yielded  a mace-head  (2972,  Pi.  XCIII,  34),  which 
lay  between  the  privy  and  the  thin  wall  of  another  room. 

A second  convenience  in  room  125  clearly  belonged  to  another  house.  This  privy 
(PI.  XIX,  f)  had  the  usual  edging  around  it  standing  2%  inches  high  above  the  surface  of 
the  pavement.*"  Its  doorway,  3 feet  8 inches  wide,  was  well  preserved  with  its  sill  at  the 
level  -f  9. 1 feet.*®  Below  this  platform  was  a larger  pavement  of  two  courses  of  brick-work; 
as  the  photograph  in  Pi.  XIX,  f shows,  there  was  a 5-inch  layer  of  debris  between  the  two.*^ 
The  earlier  floor  was  part  of  a room  whose  walls  had  practically  disappeared,  but  other 
isolated  bits  of  paving  showed  that  the  room  could  not  have  been  less  than  10x9  feet  in 
size.  Despite  being  carefully  laid,  this  paved  floor  had  subsided  badly  in  places.*®  The 
south-western  mud-brick  wall  of  this  room  is  of  later  date;  its  foundations  w’ere  9.7  feet 
above  datum.*®  From  just  north  of  locus  125  came  an  irregular  block  of  amethyst  (2865, 
PI.  XCIII,  2).  That  bead-making  was  carried  on  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  is  sug- 
gested by  this  find  and  the  number  of  stone  drills  that  were  lying  close  by. 

Northwards  from  here  in  Square  8/E  there  were  only  very  fragmentary  remains  of 
houses.  At  locus  14 1 a small  irregular  pavement,  some  2 feet  6 inches  square,®"  drained 
into  the  important  street  drain  already  mentioned,  that  emptied  in  turn  into  the  main  street 
sewer.  Close  to  this  pavement  was  a little  pottery  ink-pot  (?)  (2466,  Pi.  XCI,  3),  and  from 
locus  1 55  close  by  came  the  pottery  figurine  (3205)  seen  in  Pi.  LIV,  5.  In  the  area  92,  146 
a copper  or  bronze  adze  (2847,  Pis.  LXXI,  1 1,  LXXVI,  16)  was  found  together  with  a clay 
model  of  an  antelope  (3234,  Pi.  LVI,  1 1).  Locus  430  yielded  a seal  (3043,  Pi.  LI,  26), 
and  another  one  (3148,  Pi.  LI,  13)  of  better  workmanship  came  from  locus  113  in  the 
north-western  corner  of  the  square.  A third  seal  C3045,  Pi.  LI,  27)  was  unearthed  at  locus 
177  and  near  the  edge  of  the  mound  at  locus  142  (Sq.  8/E,  right  hand  bottom  corner) 
lay  a large  painted  sherd  of  Jhukar  date  (2666,  PI.  XXXIX,  1 5),  which  had  evidently 
been  washed  down  to  its  level  of  9.4  feet  above  datum.  At  locus  1 1 5 (Square  8/F)  a 
brick  pavement,  3 feet  2 inches  long  by  2 feet  5 inches  wide  and  surrounded  by  an  edging,®^ 
had  drained,  by  a short  channel  of  which  only  a few  bricks  remained,  into  a large  storage 
jar  (3317)  which  served  as  a cess  pit.  Adjacent  to  this  pavement  was  a shell  cone  (1929). 
A stag’s  antler  (4471)  was  found  at  locus  418  at  the  level  -L  8.7  feet,  and  from  117  came  a 
copper  chisel  (321 1,  PI.  LXX,  10). 

Several  brick  columns  in  this  neighbourhood  (Squares  8/F,  7/E,  and  y/F))  appear 
to  have  supported  the  roofs  of  workshops  open  to  the  air.®^ 

This  was  3 ft.  6 ins.  in  extent  and  its  level  -j-  9.1  ft. 

The  base  of  the  wall  was  -}-  8.3  ft. 

To  avoid  confusion  this  lower  pavement  is  not  shown  on  the  plan  in  PI.  IV. 

Its  highest  level  was  8.6  ft. 

The  bricks  in  this  wall  measured  1 2V2.  x 6Vz  x 4 ins. 

Level  was  8.3  ft.  above  datum. 

Level : -|-  8.8  ft. 

These  ranged  from  9 ins.  to  3 ft.  high  and  their  base  levels  averaged  -f  8.  i ft. 


5° 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


A platform  at  locus  1 19  (Square  7/F)  was  surrounded  by  walls  only  one  brick  bigh.” 
It  was  drained  by  a bole  in  its  north-eastern  wall.  Near  this  privy  was  a copper  or  bronze 
chisel  (3149,  Pi.  LXX,  13),  and  from  not  far  away,  at  locus  439,  came  the  stone  bone  in 
animal  shape  (3151)  illustrated  in  Pl.XCIII,  16.  At  locus  443  a little  toy  ram  (3301, 
Pi.  LVIII,  15),  once  fitted  with  wheels,  was  lying  near  some  broken  walling.  This  last 
area  also  yielded  a number  of  agate  nodules  (5178)  at  the  level  +6.6  feet,  being  raw 
material  for  another  bead-maker  whose  workshop  had  entirely  disappeared.  Close  to  the 
edge  of  the  mound  and  east  of  189  was  a seal  (2468,  Pi.  LII,  27)  at  + 9.8  feet. 

A fine  storage  jar  (3153,  PL  XXIV,  8)  was  found  at  locus  no,  and  close  to  a thin  wall, 
one  brick  high,  whose  base  was  8.2  feet  above  datum.  From  locus  1 58  (north-eastern  corner 
of  Square  7/F)  came  a pottery  jar-stand  (4295,  Pi.  XXVd,  7)  and  west  of  locus  189  and 
near  the  edge  of  the  mound  a figurine  (4069,  Pi.  FIV,  9).  The  copper  bangle  (3210)  seen 
in  Pis.  LXXIII,  30  and  FXXVI,  21  came  from  locus  299. 

A 29  feet  length  of  drain  with  a fall  of  7 inches  marked  a long  forgotten  street  in 
Square  7/E,  once  parallel  with  the  more  important  street  crossing  the  main  thoroughfare  of 
the  city  at  right  angles.  This  drain  served  a privy  at  locus  121,  but  whether  it  communicated 
with  the  main  sewage  system  we  can  never  know,  as  it  disappears  at  the  edge  of  the  mound 
at  locus  157  (PL  XVI,  f).  The  privy  (Pi.  XX,  a)  was  probably  3 feet  8 inches  square. 
Though  the  walls  are  missing,  the  brick-quarriers  had  left  its  skirting  nearly  intact  and 
standing  2%  inches  high.'*  As  is  seen  in  the  photograph,  the  water  reached  the  drain  by  a 
sloping  gutter.  The  wall,  15  inches  high,  behind  this  privy  belongs  to  the  Harappa  I 
occupation;  its  base  is  some  3 feet  higher  than  the  pavement  in  front  of  it."  This  con- 
venience appears  to  have  been  part  of  a seal-maker’s  house,  for  no  less  than  three  unfinished 
seals  were  found  in  its  close  vicinity  (3198,3052,3159,  PI.  LI,  1,  la,  2,  2a,  8,  8a).  A 
drill-cap  (4537,  PL  LXXXIX,  28)  was  also  found  here. 

Room  122,  154,  in  the  house  between  the  parallel  side  streets  (Square  7/E),  was 
8 feet  6 inches  wide,  with  its  three  remaining  walls  having  an  average  height  of  1 3 inches." 
In  this  room  was  found  a rare  type  of  round  seal  (2532,  PL  LI,  23)  and  also  a painted  wheel 
belonging  to  a large  model  cart  (2723,  PL  LVIII,  20).  This  last  is  of  especial  interest,  in 
that  it  proves  that  in  ancient  Sindh  wheels  were  made  of  three  main  pieces  just  as  are  the 
wheels  of  the  carts  used  in  that  province  today. 

The  walls  of  the  house  across  the  street  were  nearly  2 feet  thick  and  stood  a little  over  a 
foot  high.'^  The  circular  pavement  seen  in  PL  XVI,  h was  in  this  house  (Locus  306, 
sq.  7/E)  in  the  vicinity  of  the  privy.  It  measured  3 feet  7 inches  in  diameter,  but  possibly 
it  was  originally  much  larger.  It  was  constructed  of  radially  arranged  bricks  round  a small 

” The  level  of  this  pavement  wis  + 7.8  ft.  and  the  bricks  composing  it  measured  loVi  x 5I4  x 2^2 
ins.  in  size. 

The  pavement  was  + 1 1 .8  ft.  the  floor  of  the  channel  below  it  was  i ft.  lower. 

4-  14.9  ft. 

Their  bases  were  at  the  level  + 9.7  ft. 

"The  average  level  of  their  foundations  was  +9.8  ft.;  they  were  built  of  bricks  loVixfA 
X 2?6  ins.  in  size. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


51 


sunken  jar  to  whose  mouth  they  sloped  down  from  the  circumference.”  Very  similar 
circular  pavements  have  been  found  at  Harappa  and  Mohenjo-daro;  ” their  use  is  still 
uncertain.  At  Harappa  grain  was  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  jar  set  in  one  of  these  pave- 
ments, suggesting  that  they  may  have  been  used  for  hulling  or  mealing  grain.  Unfortu- 
nately, there  was  nothing  of  interest  in  the  jar  at  Chanhu-daro.  The  foundations  of  the 
walls  that  appear  in  the  plan  on  two  sides  of  this  circular  floor  were  at  a higher  level  and 
clearly  had  no  connection  with  it.*°  At  locus  97  there  were  found  six  pottery  bangles 
similar  to  those  seen  in  Pi.  XC,  26-29,  ^ tyP^  of  bracelet  commonly  worn  by  the  women  of 
Chanhu-daro. 

A well  conditioned  pavement  of  tw’O  courses  of  brick  (locus  302;  sq.  7/E)  seems  to 
have  been  the  floor  of  a bathroom  in  the  house  beyond  to  the  west.  This  measured  7 feet 
10  inches  long  by  5 feet  wide,  but  the  walls  around  it  had  been  removed  for  the  sake  of 
their  bricks  and  the  room  itself  may  actually  have  been  larger.”  A large  storage  jar  C3324, 
PI.  XXIV,  4)  on  its  eastern  side  served  to  drain  this  floor  (PI.  XVII,  g),  and  in  it  we  found  a 
human  skull,  a large  shell,  a copper  or  bronze  ring,  and  a few  implements  of  copper  or 
bronze,  some  of  which  were  broken  (Pis.  LXIX,  1 1-15,  LXXVI,  5,6).  Very  rarely  is 
anything  of  value  found  in  a drainage  jar,  save  objects  that  have  been  washed  in  acci- 
dentally, and  this  notable  exception  has  proved  of  the  greatest  interest,  as  the  report  on  this 
skull  by  Drs.  W.  M.  Krogman  and  W.  H.  Sassaman  in  Chapter  XVI  will  show.  Why  this 
skull,  shown  in  position  in  Pis.  XVII,  h and  XCIV,  2,  3,  was  buried  here  without  the  rest  of 
the  skeleton,  and  whether  it  had  any  connection  with  the  objects  found  with  it,  must  he  left 
to  the  imagination  of  the  reader. 

The  peculiar  masonry  to  the  right  of  this  jar  (Pi.  XVII,  g)  and  partly  resting  on  it,  is 
a rectangular  column,  2 feet  7 inches  by  i foot  6 inches,  which  stood  2 feet  high  with  its 
base  at  the  level  -h  9.0  feet. 

At  locus  88  in  the  same  square  (7/E)  were  the  remains  of  the  only  staircase  found  at 
Chanhu-daro,  possibly  many  others  had  been  demolished  for  the  sake  of  their  bricks.  This 
flight  (Pi.  XX,  b)  was  but  2 feet  wide  with  treads  814  inches  broad  and  rising  1 1V2  inches.®^ 
Unluckily,  there  was  nothing  to  show  to  what  it  led,  but  it  was  more  probably  to  a roof  than 
to  an  upper  storey,  for  the  walls  of  the  house  behind  it  were  very  thin. 

Near  the  foot  of  this  stairway,  at  locus  164,  a seal  (2595,  Pi.  Eli,  22)  and  a pottery 
figurine  (3334,  PI.  LIV,  6)  were  found.  In  room  88  behind  was  another  figurine  (4070, 
PI.  EIII,  2)  and  a gamesman  (1780,  Pi.  EIX,  21).  This  little  chamber  was  some  ii  feet 
long  and  its  walls  stood  only  8 inches  high  except  for  the  portion  abutting  against  the 
staircase.”  West  of  and  near  locus  300,  a second  seal  (2530,  PI.  Eli,  31)  was  unearthed 
at  the  level  + 9.5  feet. 

The  edge  of  this  pavement  was  at  -j-  8.6  ft.  and  there  was  a fall  of  6 ins.  to  its  centre. 

Ann.  Ref.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  1928-29,  p.  79;  pi.  XXX,  a. 

They  stood  only  a brick  high  with  their  bases  at  the  level  -}-  10.2  ft. 

Its  surface  level  was  9.5  ft. 

Its  foot  was  7.4  ft.  above  datum  and  its  top-most  tread  was  a trifle  over  3 ft.  higher. 

Their  bases  were  at  -j-  8.0  ft. 


52 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Room  159  of  the  house  opposite  (square  6/F)  was  entered  by  a well  preserved 
doorway,  4 feet  wide,  on  its  north-eastern  side,  whose  northern  jamb  still  stood  2 feet  8 
inches  high.'*  From  this  room  we  recovered  a seal  (2605,  Pi.  LII,  24)  and  a small  storage 
jar  (3321,  Pi.  XXIV,  7);  the  latter  had  probably  been  used  to  store  valuables,  for  its  rim 
was  set  6 inches  below  the  foundations  of  the  walls.  The  remains  of  a massive  mud-brick 
wall  immediately  north-west  of  this  room  has  yet  to  be  examined.  Near  it  at  locus  434  we 
unearthed  a copper  or  bronze  razor  (3319,  Pi.  LXXVI,  28)  at  -f  7.1  feet. 

The  excavation  of  this  Harappa  II  stratum  has  produced  interesting  evidence  that 
many,  if  not  most,  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  portion  of  the  site  were  artisans.  It  is  safe 
to  infer  from  the  many  tools  and  implements,  some  of  them  unfinished  castings,  scattered 
about  the  squares  8/B,  8/C,  and  9/C,'^  that  this  quarter  of  the  city  was  occupied  by  metal- 
workers. In  addition  to  isolated  tools,  considerable  hoards  of  copper  and  bronze  tools  and 
utensils,  all  compacted  together  by  corrosion,  were  found  in  several  places,  and,  though  very 
similar  groups  have  been  unearthed  in  the  residential  parts  of  Mohenjo-daro,  where  they 
were  probably  the  outfits  of  carpenters  and  the  like,  these  hoards  at  Chanhu-daro  are  shown 
by  the  presence  of  castings  to  have  been  the  property  of  actual  metal-workers. 

Whether  the  two  little  bronze  carts  found  in  this  quarter  at  loci  i o i and  2 1 3 (Squares 
7/C  and  9/C)  had  already  been  used  as  toys,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  No  furnaces  that  could 
have  been  used  for  smelting  and  metal-casting  have  yet  been  found;  it  is  quite  possible  that 
this  kind  of  work  was  carried  on  well  outside  the  city  and  brought  in  to  be  finished. 

Bead-making  was  an  important  source  of  revenue.  Large  numbers  of  unfinished  beads, 
together  with  the  stone  drills  used  for  boring  them,  were  taken  from  Squares  8/C,  9/C, 
9/D,  and  9/F.®®  The  north-eastern  side  of  the  “ Great  Cutting  ” yielded  also  many  speci- 
mens. Supplies  of  the  raw  materials  for  bead-making  were  also  unearthed;  in  several 
cases  nodules  of  agate  showed  signs  of  having  been  treated  with  heat."  There  were  also 
lumps  of  amethyst,  crystal,  and  carnelian.  The  principal  focus  of  bead-making  seems  to 
have  been  the  southern  quarter  of  the  city,  though  this  craft  was  also  practised  elsewhere. 

Closely  associated  with  bead-making  was  the  manufacture  of  stone  weights,  many  of 
which  are  so  highly  finished  that  we  suspect  that  they  were  used  for  testing  purposes. 
Specimens  of  unfinished  weights,  which  we  must  presume  were  left  in  the  places  where 
they  were  made,  were  unearthed  in  Squares  8/C,  8/E,  9/D,  9/E,  and  9/F." 

Eight  unfinished  seals  of  the  Harappa  Period  were  found  in  Squares  7/C,  7/E,  8/D, 
8/F  and  Trench  D(i),"  which  suggests  that  the  northern  quarter  of  the  city  was  engaged 
in  this  craft;  unfinished  seals  have  been  found  nowhere  else  save  one  example  in  the 
Cutting. 

Another  possible  industry  which  seems,  however,  not  to  have  been  closely  localized, 

'*  The  sill  of  this  entry  was  -f-  8.1  ft.,  and  its  foundations  some  4 ins.  lower. 

Loci  297,  228. 

«“Loci  450,  293,  190,215,  174,85,  253. 

Loci  237,  443,  215,  139,  and  124  in  squares  7/C,  7/F,  9/C,  and  9/D. 

Loci  1 51,  103,  215,  172, 427,  187,  at  levels  ranging  from  -f-  6.6  to  -f- 12.7  ft. 

Loci  459,  121,  223,  344,  56. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


53 


was  Lone  working,  though  very  few  finished  articles  in  this  material  have  been  recovered. 
Perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to  accept  the  view  of  Colonel  Sewell  that  the  horns  of 
the  sambar  deer  were  used  in  medicine,^"  in  which  case  the  places  at  which  these  horns 
were  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  some  of  them  hearing  saw-cuts,  may  have  been  the  positions 
of  druggist  shops.^^  Very  few  ivory  objects  were  found,  and  the  working  of  this  material 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  extensively  practised. 

Shell-working  was  certainly  carried  on,  but  only  in  a small  degree,  most  of  the 
evidence  coming  from  the  northern  part  of  the  mound.  Four  unfinished  bangles  (Pi. 
XC,  15)  were  found  at  locus  181  in  Square  9/E,  and  unfinished  shell  dishes  came  from 
Squares  7/D,  8/C,  8/D,  8/E,  and  9/C.’^  Two  shell  balls  (PI.  LIX,  14,  15),  apparently 
unfinished,  were  unearthed  in  Squares  8/C  and  9/D.”  The  raw  material  for  this  work, 
the  untouched  shell  (PI.  XC,  i),  was  often  found;  univalve  shells  with  marked  protub- 
erances appeared  in  room  215  and  other  parts  of  Square  9/D.  Shell  was  also  used,  though 
not  in  large  quantities,  for  beads  of  the  wafer  type. 

The  white  paste  plaques  (as  PI.  XCI,  21, 22)  that  came  from  near  locus  137  in 
Square  9/E  show  signs  of  being  used  in  the  process  of  glazing;  it  will  be  noted  that  they 
were  found  in  the  bead-making  quarter  of  the  city.  Similar  plaques  which  had  evidently 
been  washed  down  were  unearthed  in  Trenches  C(2),  D(i),  G(i),  and  E(i).  Judging 
from  the  number  of  glazed  beads  that  were  found,  the  art  of  glazing  must  have  been 
extensively  practised  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Square  6/C 

Animal  figure  (2721,  PI.  LV,  7).  Locus  266.  Level:  -(-9-oE- 
Drain-pipe  (2720,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  17).  Locus  266.  Level:  +8.5  ft. 

Square  6/E 

Weight  (3164,  PI.  XCI,  32).  Locus  431.  Level:  -f-  lo.i  ft. 

Scale-beam  (2601,  Pis.  LXXI,  i;  LXXVI,  18).  Locus  330.  Level;  9.2  ft. 

Square  6/E 

Copper  ring  (3411,  PI.  LXXIII,  10).  Locus  434.  Level:  -{-7.1ft. 

Square  y/C 

Pottery  bulla  (1895,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  3).  Locus  98.  Level:  -{-12.0  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (4398,  PI.  XXIX,  4).  Locus  102.  Level:  -{-9.6  ft. 

Pottery  group  (3489,  PI.  XXVIII,  30-32).  Locus  461.  Level:  -{-9.1ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (3490,  PI.  XXVII,  64).  Locus  461.  Level:  -{-9.1ft. 

Knife  (3496,  PI.  LXXII,  4).  Locus  238.  Level:  -|- 8.8  ft. 

Chisel  (3494,  PI.  LXX,  8).  Locus  238.  Level:  -{-7.5  ft. 

Shell  ornament  (3685,  PI.  LXXVIII,  13).  Locus  461.  Level:  -{-7.5  ft. 

Pottery  table  (3740,  PI.  XCI,  2).  Locus  98.  Level:  -{-7.2  ft. 


Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  p.  672. 

Squares  8/C,  8/E,  8/F,  and  9/D. 

Loci  321,  153,  197,  142,  103,  228;  from  levels  ranging  from  -{-  6.9  to  -{-  lo.i  ft.  PI.  XC,  3,  4,  9,  10. 
Loci  215,  297. 


54  CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 

Pottery  rattle  C4300,  PI.  LXI,  2).  Locus  267.  Level:  -f- 7.2  ft. 
ToyramC4i34,  Pl.LVIII,  12).  Locus  267.  Level:  +7.2  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3737,  PI.  LI,  6).  Locus  459.  Level:  + 7.0  ft 
CutbrickC43io,Pl.XCIL34).  Locus  134.  Level:  +6.9  ft. 

Frag,  incised  dish  C4272,  PI.  XXXVIII,  25).  Locus  134.  Level:  + 6 8 ft 
Oval  pottery  dish  (4468,  PI.  XXXIX,  18).  Locus  102.  Level:  -f  6.8  ft 
Painted  sherd  C4474,  PI.  XXXIII,  17).  Locus  269.  Level : + 6.7  ft 
Net  weight  (4565,  PI.  XCII,  14).  Locus  463.  Level :+ 6.4  ft. 

Square  7/D 

Pottery  jar  (2709,  PI.  XXIX,  42).  Locus  272.  Level:  +9.6  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (2708,  PI.  XXIX,  41).  Locus  272.  Level:  +9.4  ft. 
Paintedsherd(3472,Pl.  XXX,  3).  Locus  271.  Level:  +9.2  ft. 
Paintedsherd(27io,  Pl.XXXVI,  19)-  Locus  272.  Level:  + 9.0  ft. 

Animal  figure  (3513,  PI.  LV,  8).  Locus  319.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Painted  sherd  (4410,  PI.  XXXVII,  34,  a).  Locus  271.  Level:  + 7.2  ft. 
Painted  sherd  (4363,  PL  XXXVI,  3).  Locus  321.  Level:  +7.1  ft. 

Pottery  handled  cup  (3700,  PL  XXV,  58).  Locus  321.  Level:  +7.1  ft. 

Shell  dish  (4359,  PL  XC,  4).  Locus  321.  Level : + 7.  i ft. 
Potteryram’shead(427i,PL  LVllI,  16).  Locus  271.  Level:  + 6.8  ft. 

Pottery  bulla  C3779,  PL  LXXXVIIl,  2).  Locus  271.  Level:  + 6.7  ft. 

Square  y/E 

Pottery  draughtsman  (1780,  PL  LIX,  21).  Locus  88.  Level:  + 10.8  ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (3287,  PL  XXVII,  58).  Locus  97.  Level:  + 10.6  ft. 

Decorated  camelian  bead  (2485,  PL  LXXIX,  3).  Locus  278.  Level:  -J-  9.8  ft. 
Pottery  group  (3283,  PL  XXVIII,  18-23).  Locus  276.  Level:  +9.4  ft. 
Potterygroup(3i5o,  PL  XXVIII,  35-37).  Locus  306.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Pottery  figurine  (4070,  PL  LIII,  2).  Locus  88.  Level:  + 7.9  ft. 
PotteryconeC34i4,  Pl.LX,  35).  Locus  302.  Level:  + 7.7  ft. 

Pottery  toy  C3303,  PL  LIX,  2).  Locus  300.  Level:  +7.6  ft. 

Decorated  camelian  bead  (3334,  PL  LXXIX,  6).  Locus  278.  Level : -f  7.5  ft. 
Pottery  figurine  (3454,  PL  LIV,  4).  Locus  324.  Level:  -f  7.5  ft. 

Toy  chariot  (4533,  PL  LVIll,  13).  Locus  121.  Level:  + 6.9  ft. 

Shell  cones  (3262,  a,  b,  PL  LX,  24,  30).  Locus  1 21.  Level:  -f  6.9  ft. 

Square  y/E 

Painted  sherd  (3 183,  PL  XXXVII,  19).  Locus  1 19.  Level:  + io.6  ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (3109,  PL  XXVII,  51).  Locus  147.  Level:  -f  lo.oft. 

Pottery  figurine  (2423,  PL  LIII,  7).  Locust  18.  Level:  + 9.8  ft. 

Copper  knife  (2663,  PL  LXXll,  5).  Locus  189.  Level:  -f  8.8  ft. 

Bone  paddle  (3031,  PL  XC,  23).  Locus  147.  Level:  +8.7  ft. 

Storage  jar  (3 1 53,  A,  PL  XXXV,  2).  Locus  no.  Level:  -j- 8.7  ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (2829,  PL  XXVIl,  60).  Locus  147.  Level:  -{-8.7  ft. 

Pottery  jar-stand  (4296,  PL  XXVI,  8).  Locus  158.  Level : -f  8.6  ft. 
Paintedjar(4975,  PL  XXVI,  82).  Locus  298.  Level:  8.1  ft. 

Copper  chisel  C3149,  PL  LXXVl,  9).  Locus  1 19.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (5007,  PL  XXIX,  43,  a).  Locus  188.  Level:  -{-7.9  ft. 

Pottery  feeding-cup  (4880,  PL  XXXIX,  21).  Locus  440.  Level:  -f  7.7  ft. 
Pottery  figurine  (3201,  PL  LIV,  I ).  Locus  440.  Level:  -(-7.6  ft. 

Pottery  jar-cover  (4810,  PL  XXVL  54).  Locus  331.  Level : 4-7.5  ft. 

Pottery  whistle  (4680,  PL  LIX,  19).  Locus  158.  Level:  -{-7.2  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3359,  PL  LII,  3).  Locus  no.  Level:  -f  7.1  ft. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


Pottery  figurine  C3366,  PI.  LIV,  I o).  Locus  331.  Level:  +7-oft. 

Pottery  figurine  (3739,  PI.  LIV,  1 1 ).  Locus  240.  Level: 

Painted  sherd  (3213,  PI.  XXXVI,  24).  Locus  331.  Level:  +6.911. 

Painted  sherd  (4525,  PI.  XXXI,  22).  Locus  346.  Level : + 6.9  ft. 

Copper  arrowhead  (3309,  PI.  LXXIII,  14).  Locus  346.  Level:  +6.7  ft. 
Pottery  cosmetic  jar  C3302,  PI.  XXVII,  70}.  Locus  443.  Level:  + 6.7  ft. 

Square  8/B 

Pottery  bowl  C4403>  Ph  XXVII,  49).  Locus  232.  Level : + 9.7  ft. 

Faience  gamesman  (2400,  PI.  LX,  10).  Locus  285.  Level:  +9.6  ft. 

Metal  hoard  (2365,  PI.  LXXV,  i-io).  Locus  284.  Level:  +9.5  ft. 

Bronze  knife  (2365,  K,  PI.  LXXVI,  25).  Locus  284.  Level:  -p  9.5  ft. 

Bronze  knife  (2931,  PI.  LXX,  25).  Locus  285.  Level:  + 8.2  ft. 

Net-weight  (4367,  PI.  XCII,  9).  Locus  235.  Level:  +7.7  ft. 

Steatite  button  (3673,  PI.  LXXVIII,  9).  Locus  233.  Level:  + 7.6  ft. 

Pottery  tube  (4238,  Pis.  LXXXVIII.  12;  XC,  24).  Locus  449.  Level:  +7.6  ft. 
Decorated  carnelian  head  (3506,  PI.  LXXIX,  1 1).  Locus  451.  Level:  + 7.5  ft. 
Arrowhead  (3446,  B,  PI.  LXXIII,  3).  Locus  447.  Level:  + 7.0  ft. 

Arrowhead  (3444,  A,  PI.  LXXIII,  2).  Locus  447.  Level : + 7.0  ft. 

Square  8/C 

Painted  sherd  C3280,  PI.  XXXVI,  22).  Locus  152.  Level:  + 10.9  ft. 

Pottery  jar-stand  (2665,  PI.  XXVI,  4).  Locus  167.  Level:  + 10.9  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2467,  PL  LII,  26).  Locus  151.  Level:  + 10.5  ft. 

Stone  gamesman  (2573,  PI.  LX,  5).  Locus  170.  Level:  + 10.3  ft. 

Frag,  stone  dish  (2984,  PI.  XXIX,  47).  Locus  308.  Level:  +10.0  ft. 

Decorated  carnelian  bead  (2513,  PI.  LXXIX,  14).  Locus  226.  Level:  +9.6  ft. 
Copper  ornament  (2196,  PI.  LXXVIII,  2).  Locus  297.  Level:  +9.311. 
Tube-drill  (2596,  O,  PI.  LXXX,  9).  Locus  297.  Level:  +9.3  ft. 

Large  pottery  pan  (2596,  PI.  XXIX,  37).  Locus  297.  Level:  +9.311. 

Painted  jar  (4362,  PI.  XXVIII,  69).  Locus  152.  Level:  + 8.5  ft. 

Copper  knife  (3322,  PI.  LXXI.  8).  Locus  297.  Level:  +8.0  ft. 

Mace-head  (3684,  PI.  LXXXIX,  22).  Locus  394.  Level : + 7.9  ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (4571,  PL  XXVII,  65).  Locus  394.  Level:  + 7.5  ft. 

Pottery  gamesman  (3694,  PL  LX,  3).  Locus  308.  Level:  + 7.5  ft. 

Animal  figure  (3781,  PL  LVI,  12).  Locus  289.  Level:  + 7.4  ft. 

Painted  sherd  (4301,  PL  XXXVII,  42).  Locus  289.  Level:  +7.4  ft. 

Perforated  pottery  jar  (3536,  PL  XXVIII,  62).  Locus  295.  Level : + 7.4  ft. 
Hone  C3563,  PL  XCl,  36).  Locus  393.  Level:  + 7.3  ft. 

Pottery  whistle  (4355,  PL  LIX,  18).  Locus  170.  Level:  + 7.3  ft. 

Steatite  seal  C3485,  A,  PL  LI,  30).  Locus  231.  Level :+ 7.2  ft. 

Square  8/D 

Sherd  (2886,  PL  XXVI,  67,  a).  Locus  290.  Level:  + 9.9  ft. 

Copper  arrowhead  (2571.  PL  LXXIII,  15).  Locus  129.  Level:  + 9.6  ft. 

Toy  ram  (2937,  PL  LVIII,  1 1).  Locus  288.  Tevel:  + 8.7  ft. 

Painted  sherd  (4848,  PL  XXXI,  8).  Locus  176.  Level:  +8.1  ft. 

Painted  sherd  (4677,  PL  XXXVII,  33).  Locus  176.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Pottery  tube  (4564,  PL  XC,  25}.  Locus  89.  Level:  + 7.5  ft. 

Pottery  jar-stand  (1793,  PL  XXVI,  5).  Locus  311.  Level :+ 7.2  ft. 

Pottery  feeding-cup  (43=? i.  PL  XXV,  56).  Locus  31 1.  Level:  + 7.2  ft. 
Fish-hook  C3641,  PL  LXXIII,  17).  Locus  31 1.  Level:  +7.1  ft. 

Whetstone  (3693,  PL  LXXXIX,  21).  Locus  311.  Level:  +7.1  ft. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


56 

Square  S/E 

Painted  sherd  (2895,  PI.  XXX,  10).  Locus  113.  Level:  -j-  10. i ft. 

Pottery  figurine  (2683,  PI.  LIV,  2).  Locus  91.  Level: 

Painted  sherd  C3434,  PI.  XXXVII,  17).  Locus  185.  Level:  + 9.8  ft. 
Jar-stopper  (2897,  PI.  XXIX,  73).  Locus  155.  Level:  9-8  ft. 

Bronze  chisel  (2842,  PI.  LXX,  6).  Locus  1 14.  Level:  +9.1  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2848,  PI.  LII,  2).  Locus  425.  Level:  -|-  8.0  ft. 

Copper  razor  (2850,  PI.  LXXVI,  34).  Locus  177.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Pottery  cup  C 348 1,  PL  XXXIX,  16).  Locus  103.  Level:  -J- 7.9  ft. 

Pottery  figurine  (3190,  PI.  LIII,  6).  Locus  280.  Level:  +7.1  ft. 

Weight  (3189,  PI.  XCI,  29).  Locus  280.  Level:  -|-7-oR- 
Pottery  figurine  (3186,  PI.  LIV,  3}.  Locus  280.  Level:  + 7.0  ft. 

Pottery  jar-cover  (3080,  PI.  XXIX,  53).  Locus  423.  Level:  + 6.8  ft. 

Square  8/F 

Animal  figure  (1971,  PL  LV,  15).  Locus  149.  Level:  + io-7  R- 
Frag,  faience  bangle  (1961,  PL  LXXVII,  5).  Locus  1 17.  Level;  -j-  9.9  ft. 
Painted  sherd  (3338,  PL  XXX,  23).  Locus  145.  Level:  + 9-9  R. 

Pottery  cosmetic  jar  (4093,  PL  XXVII,  72).  Locust  15.  Level:  -j- 8.0  ft. 
Animal  figure  (3989,  PL  LVI,  7).  Locus  259.  Level:  7.0  ft. 

Clay  model  axe  C3170,  PL  LXXXIX,  30).  Locus  418.  Level:  -|-  7.0  ft. 

Metal  objects  (3145,  PL  LXXVI,  I,  2).  Locus  417.  Level:  + 7.1  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3200,  PL  LI,  7).  Locus  344.  Level;  -4-6.9  ft. 

Copper  razor  (3214,  PL  LXXIII,  22).  Locus  148.  Level:  6.8  ft. 

Pottery  net-sinker  (3171,  PL  XCI,  16).  Locus  115.  Level:  -|-6.8ft. 
Feeding-cup  (4074,  PL  XXXIX,  20).  Locust  16.  Level:  -4'6.7ft. 

Pottery  perforated  jar  (4073,  PL  XXVI,  3)-  Locus  1 16.  Level:  6.6  ft. 
Pottery  toy-cart  (5008,  PL  LVIII,  5).  Locus  1 15.  Level:  + 6.6  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3049,  PL  LI,  16).  Locus  1 15.  Level:  + 6.5  ft. 

Flint  saw  C3162,  PL  XCIII,  27).  Locust  15.  Level:  -4-6.4  ft. 

Copper  knife  (3147,  PL  LXXII,  3).  Locus  260.  Level:  -\-6.zh. 

Brick  runnel  (4609,  PL  XCI,  18).  Locus  4 1 4.  Level:  -f  4.2  ft. 

Square  gjC 

Ivory  object  (2351,  PL  LXXXIX,  1 5).  Locus  1 90.  Level:  -Fto.5ft. 
Ornament  (2385,  PL  LXXVIII,  I ).  Locus  263.  Level:  -f- 10.4  ft. 

Pottery  cup  (2816,  PL  XXVI,  60).  Locus  228.  Level:  -j-  10.3  ft. 

Bronze  casting  (2495,  PL  LXX,  27).  Locus  208.  Level:  -j-  9.9  ft. 

Pottery  group  (2594,  PL  XXVIII,  38-41)-  Locus  228.  Level:  -(- 9.9  ft. 
Bead-hone  (3013,  PL  XCIII,  1 1).  Locus  208.  Level:  9.7  ft. 

Pottery  bowl  (2694,  PL  XXVII,  67).  Locus  205.  Level : + 9.3  ft. 

Copper  arrow-head  (2540,  PL  LXXIII,  4).  Locus  208.  Level:  -j-  p.t  ft. 
Pottery  bowl  C2775,  PL  XXVII,  30).  Locus  208.  Level:  -fip.tft. 

Bronze  chisel  (2469,  PL  LXX,  9).  Locus  294.  Level:  -j- 8.9  ft. 

Bronze  chisel  (2645,  PL  LXX,  I ).  Locus  292.  Level:  -f  8.6  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3154,  PL  LII,  18).  Locus  395.  Level:  -J- 7.7  ft. 

Pottery  rattle  C4978,  PL  LXI,  3).  Locus  395.  Level:  -f  7.3  ft. 

Pottery  kohl-jar  C3484,  PL  XXVII,  92).  Locus  291.  Level:  -{-7.1  ft. 

Bronze  axe  (3697,  PL  LXXI,  4)-  Locus  205.  Level:  -F7.ift. 

Pottery  insect  cage  (4230,  PL  XXVII,  79)-  Locus  291.  Level:  -f- 7.1  ft. 

Ivory  comb  (3488,  PL  LXXXIX,  12).  Locus  205.  Level:  -(-7.1ft. 

Fish-hook  (3487,  Pis.  LXXIII,  18;  LXXVI,  15).  Locus  292.  Level:  + 7.0 ft. 


MOUND  II:  SECOND  HARAPPA  OCCUPATION 


57 


Painted  jar  C4229,  PL  XXVI,  58).  Locus  291.  Level:  + 7.0  ft. 

Stone  drill-head  (4687,  PI.  XCII,  3).  Locus  206.  Level:  + 6.8  ft. 

Pottery  whistle  C4646,  PL  LIX,  20).  Locus  389.  Level:  -f  6.7  ft. 

Square  g/D 

Bronze  chisel  (2295,  PL  LXXVI,  10).  Locus  262.  Level:  -j-  10.7  ft. 

Decorated  camelian  bead  (2326,  Q,  PL  LXXIX,  13).  Locus  215.  Level:  + 10.4  ft. 
Lump  of  crystal  (2326,  E,  PL  XCIII,  0-  Locus  215.  Level:  + 10.4  ft. 

Bead-tool  (2375,  PL  LXXX,  3).  Locus  215.  Level:  -(-10.3  ft. 

Bead-tool  (2304,  PL  LXXX,  6).  Locus  215.  Level:  -(-10.2  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (4406,  PL  XX VI,  72).  Locus  264.  Level:  -j-io.oft. 

Faience  gamesman  (2419,  PL  LX,  1 1 ).  Locus  287.  Level : -f  9.9  ft. 

Shell  ladle  (PL  2453,  PL  XC,  13).  Locus  179.  Level:  -(-9.8  ft. 

Drain-pipe  (3464,  PL  LXXXVIII,  16).  Locus  95.  Level:  -(-9.5  ft. 

Copper  knife  (2408,  PL  LXX,  24).  Locus  215.  Level:  -(-9.4  ft. 

Decorated  camelian  bead  (2434,  PL  LXXIX,  2).  Locus  215.  Level : -(-  9.4  ft. 

Ivory  peg  (2405,  PL  LXXXIX,  7).  Locus  215.  Level : -(-  9.3  ft. 

Pottery  bangle  (3002,  PL  XC,  34).  Locus  139.  Level:  -L  9.1  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2597,  PL  LII,  i).  Locus  192.  Level:  -j-  8.9  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2558,  PL  LII,  12).  Locus  106.  Level:  -(-  8.8  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (2988,  PL  XXVI,  69).  Locus  264.  Level:  -(-  8.5  ft. 

Mace-head  (2838,  PL  LXXXIX,  26}.  Locus  139.  Level:  -(-8.4  ft. 

Bronze  chisel  (2642,  PL  LXX,  7).  Locus  174.  Level:  -(-  8.3  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (3168,  PL  LII,  4).  Locus  211.  Level:  -(-8.1ft. 

Copper  ring  (3167,  PL  LXXIII,  12).  Locus2ii.  Level:  -(-8.1ft. 

Painted  sherd  C4047,  PL  XXXI,  15)-  Locus  174.  Level:  -(-8.0  ft. 

Copper  arrowhead  (3208,  PL  LXXIII,  16).  Locus  209.  Level : -(-  7.6  ft. 

Round  pottery  plaque  (3500,  PL  XCII,  18).  Locus  287.  Level:  -(-7.1ft. 

Animal  figure  (4252,  PL  LVI,  3).  Locus  133.  Level:  -(-7.0  ft. 

Painted  sherd  (4656,  PL  XXXIII,  8).  Locus  195.  Level:  -(-7.0  ft. 

Cut  sherd  (4340,  PL  XXXVIII,  1 1 )•  Locus  133.  Level:  -(-6.9  ft. 

Fish-hook  (3038,  PL  LXXIII,  7).  Locus  139.  Level:  -(-6.9  ft. 

Pottery  cone  (3461,  PL  LX,  27).  Locus  283.  Level:  -(-6.8  ft. 

Painted-sherd  (5429,  PL  XXXVII,  44).  Locus 95.  Level:  -(-  6.7  ft. 

Pottery  group  (4657,  PL  XXVIII,  45-48).  Locus  209.  Level:  -(-5.9  ft. 

Frag,  incised  dish  (4414,  PL  XXXVIII,  18).  Locus  192.  Level:  -(-4.2  ft. 

Square  g/E 

Decorated-camelian  bead  (2797,  PL  LXXIX,  10).  Locus  125.  Level:  -(-9.7  ft. 
Pottery  bowl  C4402,  PL  XXVII,  56).  Locus  254.  Level:  -(-9.6  ft. 

Copper  razor  (2608,  PL  LXXIII,  25).  Locus  126.  Level:  -(-  8.5  ft. 

Cut  sherd  C4036,  PL  XXXVIII,  7).  Locus  201.  Level:  -(-8.4  ft. 

Spear-head  (2602,  PL  LXXI,  12).  Locus  137.  Level:  -(-8.3  ft. 

Frag,  pottery  bangle  (2747,  PL  LXXVII,  1 1).  Locus  128.  Level:  -(-  8.3  ft. 

Weight  (2867,  PL  XCI,  31).  Locus  127.  Level:  -(-8.3  ft. 

Frag,  incised  dish  (4465,  PL  XXXVIII,  19).  Locus  in.  Level:  -(-  7.5  ft. 

Flint  drill  (2941,  PL  XCIII,  7).  Locus  85.  Level:  -(-7.4  ft. 

Shell  ladle  (4046,  PL  XC,  17).  Locus  1 71.  Level:  -(-7.2  ft. 

Round  pottery  plaque  (4541.  PL  XCII,  23).  Locus  in.  Level:  -(-7.2  ft. 

Copper  razor  (2846,  PL  LXXVI,  36).  Locus  224.  Level:  -(-6.9  ft, 

Faience  jar  (2936,  PL  LXXXIX,  2).  Locus  224.  Level : -(-  6.9  ft. 

Scale-beam  (2964,  PL  LXXI,  3).  Locus  1 71.  Level:  -(-6.9  ft. 

Copper  razor  (2846,  PL  LXXIII,  26).  Locus  224.  Level:  -(-6.9  ft. 


58 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Faience  bangle  (2924,  PI.  XC,  37).  Locus  198.  Level:  + 6.8  ft. 

Pottery  jar  (3419,  PI.  XXIX,  46).  Locus  171.  Level:  + 6.5  ft. 

Square  9/F 

Hone  (3278,  PI.  XCI,  37)-  Locus  184.  Let'el:  -j-  ^°-7  R- 
Painted  sherd  (3435,  PI.  XXXVII,  22).  Locus  265.  Level: 

Brick  runnel  (4608,  PI.  XCI,  17).  Locus  410.  Level:  -j- 9-5  ft- 
Pottery  cone  (4520,  PI.  LX,  26).  Locus  258.  Level : + 8.6  ft. 

Triangular  plaque  (4521,  PI.  XCII,  26).  Locus  258.  Level:  + 8.5  ft. 

Pottery  tube  (4196,  PI.  LXXXVIII,  7).  Locus  401.  Level:  + 8.2  ft. 

Cut  brick  (4021,  PI.  XCII,  8).  Locus  406.  Level:  + 8.0  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2845,  PI.  LI,  19).  Locus  405.  Level:  T 8.0  ft. 

Flint  drill  (2957,  PI.  XCIII,  8).  Locus  255.  Level:  T 6.9  ft. 

Animal  figure  (3120,  PI.  LV,  14).  Locus  407.  Level:  6.4  ft. 

Decorated  camelian  bead  (3999,  PI.  LXXIX,  7).  Locus  473.  Level:  +3.2  ft. 

Square  g/G 

Bronze  chisel  (3 1 52,  PI.  LXX,  1 1 ).  Locus  439.  Level : +7.5  ft. 

Square  10/C 

Steatite  seal  (3326,  PI.  LII,  to).  Locus  385.  Level:  + 6.9  ft. 

Pottery  cosmetic  jar  (4232,  PI.  XXVII,  78).  Locus  385.  Level:  6.9  ft. 

Pottery  figurine  (3418,  PI.  LIV,  8).  Locus  381.  Level:  -b  6.8  ft. 

Square  lo/D 

Painted  bowl  (4666,  PI.  XXVIII,  64).  Locus  248.  Level : + 6.9  ft. 

Steatite  seal  (2603,  PI.  LII,  13).  Locus  362.  Level:  -)-6.8ft. 

Pottery  jar-cover  (2756,  PI.  XXIX,  62).  Locus  362.  Level:  + 6.7  ft. 

Square  lo/E 

Bone  pulley  (2457,  PI.  XCI,  5).  Locus  230.  Level:  + 8.8  ft. 

Pottery  jar-cover  (3409,  PI.  XXIX,  66).  Locus  261.  Level : +7.5  ft. 

Ivory  die  (2670,  PI.  LX,  16).  Locus  359.  Level:  + 7.1  ft. 

Square  10/E 

Steatite  seal  (3318,  PI.  LII,  28).  L0CUS423.  Level:  -f  6.7ft. 


Chapter  V 


MOUND  I 

Mound  I is  only  a little  over  150  feet  south-west  of  Mound  II  (Pi.  II),  and,  though 
it  covers  a smaller  area,  it  was  only  a foot  under  the  height  of  the  latter  mound. ^ Its  sides, 
like  those  of  Mound  II,  are  steep  and  deeply  hssured  by  rains  on  the  north  and  west 
(PI.  IX,  f),  but  inclined  gently  on  the  south  and  west,  though  here,  too,  deep  furrows 
have  been  cut  by  water. 

Except  for  several  exploratory  trenches  cut  by  Mr.  Majumdar  in  1931,  the  mound 
was  untouched  when  we  commenced  work  upon  it  late  in  the  season.  Our  own  examination 
of  it  was  necessarily  very  brief  and  confined  to  a portion  of  the  summit  only.  There  appears 
to  be  no  doubt  that  Mound  I was  originally  a part  of  Mound  II  and  that  a flood,  or  a series 
of  floods,  separated  them  from  one  another.^  The  deep  cutting  that  we  made  close  to  the 
south-western  side  of  Mound  II  and  extending  into  that  mound  itself  revealed  traces  of 
buildings  obviously  connected  at  one  time  with  masonry  lying  on  the  outskirts  of  Mound  I. 
These  buildings  had  been  partly  swept  away  and  then  covered  beneath  a thick  layer 
of  alluvium. 

We  commenced  our  examination  of  this  mound  on  the  morning  of  February  19th, 
1936,  but  as  it  was  closely  surrounded  by  private  land  we  were  not  able  to  deposit  the  spoil 
earth  far  enough  away;  for  this  reason  we  could  not  employ  as  many  men  for  the  work  as 
we  should  have  wished.  In  another  season  arrangements  could  be  made  with  the  owner  of 
the  adjacent  land  to  allow  us  to  use  part  of  it  as  a dumping  ground,  thus  giving  us  plenty 
of  space  in  which  to  work. 

It  would  appear  that  the  mound  was  occupied  solely  by  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 
A few  sherds  of  the  Jhukar  people  were  unearthed,^  but  so  few  in  number  compared  with 
the  large  quantities  found  on  Mound  II  that  they  had  probably  been  left  there  by  casual 
visitors.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  be  certain  on  this  point  until  more  extensive  digging 
has  been  done. 

On  reference  to  the  plan  in  Pi.  II,  it  will  be  seen  that  one  house  occupied  most  of 
Square  12/K  with,  as  shown  by  the  drainage  system,  a lane  on  both  its  eastern  and  southern 
sides.  The  entrance  from  the  street  on  the  south  was  3 feet  7V2  inches  wide  and  each  of 
its  well  made  jambs  still  stood  2 feet  6 inches  high.'*  The  door-way  led  into  room  27, 
which  averaged  7 feet  1 1 inches  in  length  by  5 feet  6 inches  in  width.  The  well  preserved 
eastern  wall  of  this  room  still  stood  4 feet  4 inches  high  (PI.  XXII,  a,  e). 

An  unbonded  partition  wall  separated  room  27  from  room  44,  which  was  nearly  square 
though  inaccurately  built.  A doorw'ay  on  the  northern  side  of  this  room  was  3 feet  2 inches 

^ It  was  22.2  ft.,  above  datum  at  its  northern  end. 

= For  the  relation  of  this  mound  to  Mound  II,  see  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  IV  (b). 

3 Pis.  XXXIX,  9,  13;  XL,  18,  XLI,  4,  35,  XLII,  15,  21,  22,  XLIII,  9,  XLV,  21,  XLVI,  3,  9,  29, 
XLVIII,  4. 

* Its  sill  was  15.5  ft.  above  datura. 


59 


6o 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


wide,  and  its  sill,  which  was  still  in  excellent  condition,  stood  1 5 feet  above  datum.  The 
walls  here  averaged  3 feet  in  height  and  were  in  a strikingly  good  state  of  preservation, 
considering  that  they  were  only  one  brick  thick  and  lay  but  a few  inches  below  the  surface 
of  the  mound. 

Room  15,29  was  not  so  well  preserved,  especially  on  the  western  side,  although  the 
northern  and  eastern  walls  averaged  2 to  4 feet  in  height.  This  room  opened  into  the  large 
room  20  through  a doorway  estimated  to  have  been  4 feet  wide;  both  the  northern  jamb 
of  the  door  and  its  sill  were  in  a ruinous  condition.  As  far  as  we  could  tell  the  sill  seems 
to  have  been  at  about  the  same  level  as  the  other  door-sills  in  the  house.  The  centre  of 
this  last  room  yielded  a pottery  stand  (5029,  Pis.  LXXXIX,  4,  XCII,  36),  a large  round 
stone  C4754,  Pi.  XCI,  45)  like  some  found  in  Mound  II,  and  a fragment  of  a faience  bangle 
C4429,  PI.  XC,  38).  All  these  were  at  the  level  + 14.0  feet.  A pottery  grating  (5030, 
Pi.  XCII,  20)  came  from  the  south-eastern  corner  of  this  room  at  the  same  level. 

PL  XXII,  f (extreme  right  hand  side)  shows  how  badly  denuded  was  the  large  chamber 
20,  30, 60.  No  definite  doorways  could  be  traced  save  the  one  leading  from  room  29  and 
another,  a very  narrow  one,  entering  the  paved  room  58  on  the  east.  This  room  was  possibly 
divided  at  one  time  into  two  apartments  by  a wall  one  brick  in  thickness.  The  eastern  end 
of  this  partition  wall  when  cleared  stood  a little  under  a foot  high,  but  it  petered  out 
towards  the  west.  Its  foundations  were  at  the  level  + 14.2  feet,  and  part  of  it  rested  on 
another  thin  wall,  not  in  alignment  with  it,  which  has  yet  to  he  examined.  Broken  frag- 
ments of  paving  at  locus  60  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  room  lay  14.3  feet  above 
datum,  i.  e.,  only  a few  inches  above  the  foundations  of  the  near-by  walls.® 

The  small  room  58  was  much  more  interesting.  It  must  have  been  entered  from  the 
west  and  through  or  over  a wall  which  had  been  destroyed  to  below  pavement  level,  for  no 
other  entrance  could  be  found.  It  measures  6 feet  i o inches  long  by  5 feet  5 inches  wide, 
and  was  at  one  time  paved  all  over  with  one  course  of  bricks  laid  on  their  flats.  These 
bricks  were  of  various  sizes  and  had  evidently  been  taken  at  random  from  other  buildings, 
possibly  from  some  distance  off.  The  pavement  itself  was  14.8  feet  above  datum,  and  the 
walls  surrounding  it  stood  for  the  most  part  nearly  2 feet  high.®  The  cell-like  room  14 
contained  a wheel  from  a model  cart  (5059,  Pi.  LVIII,  23)  and  a gamesman  (4430,  Pi. 
LX,  9),  both  lying  at  the  level  + 14.1  feet.  The  western  wall  of  room  58  was  not  shared  by 
the  eastern  wall  of  room  60,  although  it  is  difficult  to  see  any  reason  why  it  should  not 
have  been. 

In  the  north-western  comer  of  room  1 5 was  a block  of  masonry  of  nearly  solid  con- 
stmction,  which,  in  all  probability,  had  been  built  to  support  a heavy  roof  beam.^ 

West  of  room  20,  30  were  the  remains  of  a large  courtyard  whose  walls  were  rather 
more  substantial  than  those  of  the  house  itself.  As  will  be  seen  in  Pi.  XXII,  c (distance  on 
left),  little  of  this  courtyard  remained,  but  there  was  enough  to  show  that  it  had  been  about 
18  feet  square. 

' These  averaged  14.8  ft.  above  datum. 

® Their  foundations  were  13.9  ft.  above  datum. 

' The  top  of  this  was  16.1  ft.  above  datum;  its  foundations  were  2 ft.  deeper. 


MOUND  I 


6i 

Another  house  (Sq.  12/J)  lying  to  the  east  of  the  one  just  described  and  separated 
from  it  by  a narrow  street  was  so  close  to  the  edge  of  the  mound  as  to  be  in  a very  ruinous 
condition  (PI.  XXII,  f).  Even  in  its  original  state  this  house  must  have  been  a ramshackle 
affair.  The  little  patch  of  paving,  one  brick  thick,  at  the  level  + 13.9  feet  in  the  north- 
western corner  of  room  25  was  all  that  remained  of  a privy.  It  had  formerly  been  sur- 
rounded by  a wall,  about  5 inches  thick,  enclosing  a space  3 feet  4 inches  square.  The 
owner  of  this  house  evidently  kept  an  animal  or  two,  for  a round  manger  was  unearthed  near 
locus  54.  This  was  16  inches  in  diameter  and  built  of  bricks  10V2  inches  long,  set  on  their 
ends  (Pis.  XVI,  g,  XXII,  b).^ 

PI.  XXII,  a,  b show  the  condition  of  the  masonry  on  this  north-eastern  side  of  the 
mound. 

In  a narrow  street  along  the  southern  side  of  this  house  was  a brick  drain,  with  a 
channel  inches  wide  by  6 inches  deep.  But  the  width  of  the  street  was  uncertain, 
because  there  was  no  wall  on  the  opposite  side.  The  drain,  and  presumably  the  street  as 
well,  turned  southwards  at  right  angles  and  then  again  at  right  angles  to  the  west.  This 
latter  part  of  the  street  was  better  preserved;  it  was  3 feet  8 inches  and  4 feet  8 inches  at  its 
eastern  and  western  ends  respectively.  Here  the  channel  of  the  drain  was  yH  inches  wide 
by  5^6  inches  deep,  the  sides  being  of  bricks  laid  on  their  longer  edges  and  covered  by 
bricks  laid  on  their  flats.  The  western  end  of  this  water  channel  could  not  be  traced;  both 
it  and  the  ground  in  which  it  lay  had  subsided  badly  owing  to  floods.  The  walls  of  the 
houses  on  either  side  of  this  little  street  were  only  a brick  thick  (loli  inches)  and  averaged 
3 to  4 feet  higher  than  the  cover  of  the  drain,  which,  when  in  use,  must  have  been  a 
few  inches  below  the  earthen  surface  of  the  street.® 

Room  21, 47  of  the  house  on  the  southern  side  of  this  street  was  very  dilapidated.  Its 
western  and  southern  sides  measured  9 feet  8 inches  and  3 feet  5 inches  respectively,  and 
in  the  shorter  side  there  was  a wide  entrance  into  room  36,49  (PI.  XXII,  c,  centre).  This 
second  room  was  only  4 feet  8 inches  wide  at  its  southern  end,  but  the  western  wall,  which 
was  roughly  built  of  bricks  laid  on  their  longer  edges  as  headers  and  their  flats  as  stretchers, 
was  18  feet  5 inches  in  length  (PI.  XXII,  d).  In  this  wall  was  a doorway,  about  4 feet  in 
width,  whose  sill  was  missing.  The  length  of  room  36, 49  makes  it  probable  that  it  had 
originally  been  divided  into  two  parts  with  an  entry  through  the  partition.  A narrow, 
projecting  footing  inside  the  remains  of  the  eastern  wall  was  only  three  bricks  high  and 
possibly  marked  the  presence  of  an  earlier  wall."®  In  front  of  the  wrecked  doorway  here  a 
brick,  used  as  a door-socket  (5060,  Pi.  XCI,  14),  was  unearthed  in  locus  23. 

Room  46  averaged  8 feet  8 inches  long  by  7 feet  wide,  but  though  the  walls  surrounding 
it  reached  an  average  of  2 feet  in  height,  no  doorway  could  be  seen  in  them  (PI.  XXII,  c, 
background).  Possibly  this  little  enclosure  had  been  filled  up  to  make  a sleeping  platform, 
like  those  used  in  modern  Sindhi  villages,  but  in  this  case  it  was  difficult  to  see  why  its 

® The  top  of  this  manger  was  14.6  ft.  above  datum. 

® The  bricks  used  in  these  walls  measured  loVi  x 5I4  x 2!^  ins. 

The  wall  here  stood  12  ins.  high  above  this  footing  which  was  at  the  level  of  -f  15.9  ft. 


62 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


foundations  should  be  13.4  feet  above  datum  and  agreeing  with  the  same  level  as  that  of 
the  other  walls  near-by. 

It  is  difficult  to  sav  whether  rooms  38,45  and  61  (Pi.  XXII,  c,  left  middle  distance) 
formed  part  of  one  or  two  houses,  for  only  about  1 2 feet  remained  of  the  long  wall  bounding 
them  on  the  south  (Sq.  12/K)  and  this  was  only  one  brick  high.“  Room  38  contained  an 
unfinished  mace-head  (5218,  Pi.  LXXXIX,  19)  at  the  level  + 13.0  feet. 

Locus  62  was,  perhaps,  another  sleeping  platform;  its  walls,  also  one  brick  thick, 
showed  no  signs  of  a doorway.  Thev  stood,  however,  only  three  courses  high,  and  it  is 
possible  that  an  entrance  may  have  existed  above  this  level. 

The  long  wall  at  locus  61,  a brick  in  thickness,  stood  a little  under  2 feet  high  with 
foundations  at  -f  14.4  feet  level.  East  of  this  wall  at  locus  40  was  a large  stretch  of 
pavement,  1 1 feet  in  length,  E.-W.,  and  7 feet  7 inches  wide.  It  had  been  enclosed  by  a 
skirting  of  bricks  laid  on  their  longer  edges  and  was  probably  used  as  an  ablution  platform. 
The  walls  around  it  had  long  been  removed  to  serve  other  building  purposes. “ 

On  the  north-western  corner  of  this  last  feature  lav  a curious  structure,  a brick  pit, 
3 feet  3V2  inches  long  inside,  i foot  4 inches  wide,  and  i foot  deep.  It  was  still  partly 
covered  with  two  courses  of  brick  set  corbel-wise,  the  bricks  overlapping  about  an  inch. 
This  may  have  been  filled  in  and  used  as  a seat  by  the  bather  or  as  a cess  pit  of  a later  date 
than  the  pavement  on  which  it  stood. 

The  short  length  of  drain  at  the  same  corner  of  this  pavement  had  no  connection  with 
either  floor  or  pit;  it  was  at  a different  level,  with  its  flow-  towards  instead  of  away  from 
the  paving.  Its  channel  was  5 inches  in  width  and  depth, and  it  evidently  formed  part  of 
a system  of  drainage  awaiting  clearance  at  a lower  level. 

Immcdiatelv  east  of  the  long  room  36,49(89.  1 3.  K,  locus  23)  described  above,  the 
remains  of  an  elaborate  drainage  svstem  were  disclosed.  Here  w’as  a cess  pit  in  the  street, 

2 feet  10  inches  Iona  hv  i foot  4 inches  wide  inside,  with  walls  half-a-brick  thick.'® 
Beneath  this  sump,  but  evidently  associated  with  it,  was  a brick  channel,  5 inches  wide 
and  deep,  with  its  southern  end  curving  towards  the  south-east  (Pl.XXII,c).  This  drain 
sloped  considerably  from  its  southern  end  and  doubtless  drained  the  ruined  structures 
whose  remains  are  situated  in  loci  64,  65.  A small  pavement,  also  badly  preserved,  lay 
close  to  the  eastern  side  of  this  drain  and  immediately  adjacent  to  the  cess  pit.  It  was 

3 feet  10  inches  in  width  but  only  2 feet  remained  of  its  original  length,''  and  the  traces 
of  a low  brick  skirting  around  it  showed  that  it  had  been  used  as  a bathroom  or  privy. 
Erom  locus  ii  here  came  the  shell  ladle  (46987  illustrated  in  Pl.XC,  14,  together  with  a 
copper  or  bronze  ring  (4312,  Pi.  LXXIII,  1 1),  both  from  the  level  -p  14.  i feet. 

Further  south  again,  between  loci  10  and  12  (Sq.  1 3/  K),  another  short  length  of  drain 

13.3  ft.  above  datum. 

The  top  of  these  walls  were  13.3  ft.,  above  datum. 

Level  14.9  ft. 

Possibly  the  pavement  itself  was  not  removed  as  the  bricks  were  considered  impure. 

The  floor  of  this  drain  averaged  + 13.7  ft. 

It  was  2 ft.  deep  and  its  foundations  were  13.2  ft.  above  datum. 

Its  surface  was  14.2  ft.  above  datum. 


MOUND  I 


63 


was  unearthed,  evidently  a continuation  of  the  system  already  describedd®  Locus  10 
produced  a small  painted  jar  (5214,  PL  XXXIX,  25)  and  a copper  or  bronze  axe  (4898, 
Pi.  LXXI,  5)  at  + 14.0  and  + 12.9  respectively.  From  a higher  level  (+  16.2  feety  came 
the  fossil  shell  (4619)  shown  in  Pl.XCIII,  22. 

Better  built  and  thicker  walls  were  encountered  as  we  proceeded  eastwards  from  this 
lane,  but  they  were  all  in  a grievously  ruined  condition.  None  the  less,  it  was  evident 
that  this  had  been  an  important  quarter  on  this  mound.  All  these  walls  rested  on  debris 
of  considerable  thickness  and  were  nowhere  over  2 feet  high,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  photo- 
graphs in  PI.  XXII,  c,  e.^“  Other  buildings  undoubtedlv  lie  beneath  these  remains,  belonging 
to  a separate  and  earlier  occupation  of  this  part  of  the  site  bv  the  Harappa  people. 

Among  these  walls  we  found  the  remains  of  a privy  at  locus  57  (Sq.  13/']),  consisting 
of  a brick  pav’ement,  two  courses  thick,  at  the  level  + 1 5.6  feet.  This  pavement  was  drained 
by  a small  channel  running  to  the  east,  of  which  only  a length  of  6 feet  remained.  In  the 
close  v’icinity  of  these  walls,  two  pieces  of  shell  inlav  7483 1 . 4602,  PI.  XC,  7,  8 A and  a 
painted  pottery  rattle  (5065,  Pi.  LXI,  5)  were  unearthed  at  levels  between  -f  13.4  and 
+ 14.2  feet. 

From  this  preliminary’  survey  of  the  uppermost  occupation  level  of  Mound  I,  we  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  majority  of  the  buildings  on  it  could  hardly  have  been 
higher  than  one  storey.  At  the  same  time  it  is  unlikely  that  the  people  who  inhabited  these 
houses  were  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  on  the  roof,  for  not  a single  stairway  was  discovered. 
Yet  despite  their  humble  nature,  these  houses  were  as  well  drained  and  provided  with  the 
same  conveniences  as  those  of  the  better  class  dwellings  on  Mound  II. 

From  the  evidence  afforded  bv  objects  unearthed  in  and  outside  their  houses,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  summit  of  Mound  I was  occupied  to  the  last  bv  people  of  the  Harappa 
Culture.  These  people  probablv  lingered  here  until  they  gradually  died  out  or  left,  family 
bv  family,  to  join  more  prosperous  communities  elsewhere.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the 
flooding  of  the  countn’  bv  the  Indus  was  so  extensive,  so  frequent,  and  so  prolonged  each 
time  that  the  later  inhabitants  of  Chanhu-daro  were  forced  to  make  their  wav  to  lands  of 
higher  elevation,  where  they  lived  until  their  identity  was  lost  and  they  became  merged 
with  people  of  a lower  status  of  civilization.  I am  inclined  to  think  that  they  retreated 
towards  the  east,  for  the  hillv  regions  to  the  north  and  west  would  have  had  little  attraction 
for  an  urban  people  accustomed  to  the  comparative  security  of  the  plains. 

Other  parts  of  the  excavated  portion  of  Mound  I yielded  interesting  objects  which 
had  evidently  been  thrown  out  of  dismantled  buildings  bv  quarriers.  The  number  of  mace- 
heads  found,  some  of  which  are  unhnished.  show  that  stone  working  was  one  of  the  crafts 
that  were  practised  here.  Another  craft  carried  on  in  this  part  of  Chanhu-daro  was  the 
making  of  faience  objects  such  as  buttons,  nose  or  ear-plugs,  and  the  like. 

Square  12/J 

Mace-head  (57.19,  PI.  LXXXIX.  17).  Locus  18.  Level:  -[-13.311. 

The  channel  of  this  was  at  -f  13.7  ft. 

The  average  lev’el  of  the  foundations  of  these  walls  was  13.7  ft. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


64 

Square  13/J 

Weight  C3882,  PL  LXXXIX,  II ).  Locus  6.  Level;  + 16.4  ft. 

Weight  (3822,  PL  LXXXIX,  10).  Locus  3.  Level:  + 15.8  ft. 

Seal  (4596,  PL  LIL  25).  Locus  2.  Level:  -f-  14.4  ft. 

Stone  stand  (4589,  PL  XCII,  13).  Locus  2.  Level:  + i4-3  R- 
Pottery  cone  (5242,  PL  LX,  32).  Locus  3.  Level : + 14.5  ft. 

Square  13/K 

Pottery  cone  (5320,  PL  LXXXVIII,  4).  Locus  51.  Level:  -{-12.6  ft. 

Seal  (3819,  PL  XLIX,  6,  6a).  Locus  34.  Level:  -f-  13-6  ft. 

Pottery  whorl  (5071,  PL  XCII,  7).  Locus  34.  Level:  -Lt4-“ft. 

Chisel  (5019,  PL  LXX,  14).  Locus  34.  Level:  -|-  13.9  ft. 

Mace-head  (4775,  PL  LXXXIX,  20).  Locus  37.  Level; 

Gamesman  (5307,  PL  LX,  i).  Locus  67.  Level:  + 13.0  ft. 

Kohl-jar  (5199,  PL  XXXIX,  26).  Locus  34.  Level:  +t2,.9ft. 

Mace-head  (5198,  Pis.  LXXXIX,  16;  XCIII,  36).  Locus  51.  Level:  -{-  12.8  ft. 


Chapter  VI 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 

This  and  the  two  following  chapters  deal  with  the  pottery  found  in  and  around 
Mounds  I and  II  at  Chanhu-daro.  The  pieces  are  dealt  with  chronologically  (i.e.,  hnds 
from  the  lowest,  and  earliest,  levels  are  described  first)  while,  to  avoid  unnecessary  detail, 
the  specimens  illustrated  are  set  out  in  the  catalogue  at  the  end  of  this  book,  with  the 
locus  and  level  of  each  one,  the  colour  of  the  clays,  slips  and  paints,  and  other  information. 

No  traces  of  an  earlier  occupation  than  that  of  the  Harappa  Culture  have  been  dis- 
covered at  Chanhu-daro,  although  in  one  part  of  the  sitc,^  as  we  have  seen,  a special  search 
was  being  made  for  evidences  of  a still  older  civilization  when  the  level  of  the  sub  soil 
water,  some  28  feet  below  the  surrounding  plain,  was  reached.  It  was  obvious,  however, 
that  this  level  had  risen  very  considerably  since  the  Harappa  people  had  inhabited  the 
city  at  least  4,600  years  ago,  for  their  burnt  brick  buildings  were  still  standing  far  below 
the  surface  of  the  water.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  this  difficulty,  there  remains  a chance 
that  evidences  of  the  earlier  culture  already  disco\ercd  by  the  late  Mr.  Ma'iumdar  at 
Amri  in  Sindh ' may  come  to  light  at  Chanhu-daro  when  work  is  resumed  there  under 
more  favourable  conditions.  VVe  have,  at  any  rate,  been  fortunate  enough  to  find  traces 
of  three  distinct  cultures  which  succeeded  that  of  the  Harappa  civilization.  This  discover\" 
is  of  some  importance,  for  it  throws  light,  to  some  small  extent,  on  the  dark  period  between 
the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and  the  arrival  in  India  of  the  Aryan  speaking 
peoples,®  who  were  destined  to  exercise  such  an  enormous  influence  on  the  country  of  their 
adoption. 

The  earliest  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  is  illustrated 
in  Pis.  XXV,  37,  38,  41,  50,  XXVII,  i,  2,  XXIX,  13,  32,  XXXI,  2,  3,  5,  7,  1 1,  XXXII,  5, 
XXXIV,  6,  7,  XXXVI,  2,  38,  XMXVII,  14,  25,  43,  XXXVIII,  15,  22,  24.  27,  28.  All  these 
pieces  were  found  at  depths  ranging  from  15  to  as  much  as  24.8  feet  below  datum  level. 
Nos.  XXV,  50  and  XXIX,  13  are  new  to  us.  The  incised  dishes  of  food-stands  seen  in 
PI.  XXXVIII,  15,  23,  25  are  very  like  specimens  from  low  levels  at  Mohenjo-daro.* 

The  sherds  of  early  date  shown  in  Pi.  XXXVIII,  26,  27,  29  are  of  particular  interest 
and  will  be  described  more  fully  later.  Reserved  slip  wares,  to  which  type  these  three 
sherds  belong,  only  occur  in  the  lowest  levels  at  Mohenjo-daro,®  and  they  were  similarly 
low  down  at  Chanhu-daro.  At  the  former  site,  however,  only  one  slip  was  used,  the  contrast 


^ Known  as  the  “ Cutting  ” and  situated  on  the  south-western  side  of  Mound  II  (Chap.  II). 

* Exploratio7is  hi  Sind  QMein.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  48). 

^Estimated  by  some  to  have  taken  place  about  1200-1500  b.c.,  but  thought  by  others  to  have 
been  even  earlier. 

* F.  E.  M.  (Mackay,  Further  Excavations  at  Alohenjo-daro),  pi.  LXVII,  17,  18,  22,  25. 

^ F.E.  M..  pp.  45.  184,  188,  652,  668.  I have  explained  here  how  this  re.served  slip  ware  is 
related  to  that  found  in  other  countries. 


65 


66 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


being  obtained  by  exposing  tbe  natural  colour  of  the  clay.  At  Chanhu-daro  the  effect  was 
produced  by  superimposing  one  slip  on  another  of  a different  colour. 

Some  of  tbe  painted  sherds  found  in  the  lower  levels  bear  unusual  patterns  as,  for 
example,  the  disconnected  motifs  appearing  on  the  rim  of  the  broken  vessel  in  Pis.  XXXI,  7 
and  XXXVI,  38.  This  sherd  was  originally  part  of  a carefully  made  dish  or  bowl  of 
exceptional  thinness;  its  section  is  shown  just  below  the  drawing  in  Pi.  XXXI.  The  young 
pipal  plants,  painted  in  a semi-conventionalized  manner  on  the  sherds  in  PI.  XXXI,  2,  3,  5, 
1 1 , are  also  quite  unlike  other  representations  of  this  favourite  motif  which  have  come  to 
light  either  in  the  upper  levels  of  Chanhu-daro  or  elsewhere. 

The  differences  that  it  has  been  possible  to  point  out,  how'ever,  are  too  few'  to  allow 
us  to  say  with  certainty  at  present  that  the  wares  from  the  lower  levels  are  radically 
different  from  those  of  the  upper  strata,  though  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  are,  in  the 
main,  superior  in  hnish  and  painting.  Apart  from  pottery,  objects  taken  from  the  lower 
levels  seem  to  be  identical  in  form  and  workmanship  with  others  found  higher  up,  but 
when  more  of  this  early  material  has  come  to  light  it  may  then  be  possible  to  compare  it 
closely  with  that  of  later  date  and  to  get  some  idea  of  the  differences  betw'cen  the  arts  and 
crafts  of  the  various  periods.  The  culture  as  a whole  will  then  appear  in  better  perspective. 

Clays  and  Materials 

The  clays  used  by  the  Chanhu-daro  potters  resemble  those  employed  at  Mohenjo-daro 
and  Harappa.  One  is  an  alluvial  material,  tempered  with  mica,  sand,  and  lime,  w'hich 
becomes  pink  or  light  red  in  colour  when  burnt.  Mica  is  more  often  than  not  found 
naturally  associated  with  sand  in  Sindh,  but  the  lime  w-as  purposely  added  to  the  clay  by 
the  potter  and  occurs  in  appreciable  quantities.  In  some  cases  the  lime  particles  have 
swelled  and  made  cavities  in  the  surface  of  a jar. 

Sometimes  a clay  that  burnt  a grey  colour  was  used,  although  something  may  have 
been  added  to  the  raw  material  to  produce  this  effect.  The  grey  ware  found  at  Chanhu-daro 
is  frequently  gritty  to  the  touch  and  is  often  overloaded  with  lime  and  sand.®  It  is  sometimes 
coated  with  a thick  black  slip  (Pis.  XXV,  9,  XXVII,  25,  XXIX,  3,  XXXVIII,  12,  15)  or  wdth 
a dark  grey  one  (Pis.  XXV,  16,  XXVI,  83).  The  dish  in  PI.  XXVII,  25  is  dark  grey  outside 
and  black  w'ithin.  1 he  w'ares  in  Pis.  XXV,  18,  XXVII,  64,  92  have  a polished  surface.  The 
last  example,  a kohl-pot,  is  again  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIX,  22.  This  particular  type  of  ware 
was,  how'ever,  far  from  common  at  Alohenjo-daro.  At  Chanhu-daro  only  a few  specimens 
have  been  found,  and,  up  to  the  present,  none  of  them  have  appeared  at  a level  low'er 
than  — 1 5. 1 feet. 

A dirty-looking,  drab  clay  was  used  for  the  vessels  in  Pis.  XXV,  24,  XXVII,  4,  10,  1 1, 
28,  32,  XXIX,  39. 

Slips 

The  slip  usually  employed  is  yellow'ish  wTite  or  cream  in  colour  and,  wTen  applied 
too  thickly,  is  apt  to  scale.  Some  of  the  potter)-  has  no  slip  at  all,  but  the  painted  w'ares  are 

® Much  more  so  than  with  the  grey  wares  of  Mohenjo-daro.  This  grittiness  was  particularly  notice- 
able in  the  pottery  shown  in  pis.  XXVI,  33,  48,  XXVII,  20,  21,  47,  XXVIII,  48,  50. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CUETURE  67 

normally  coated  with  a red  slip  bearing  an  appreciable  polish.  Red-coloured  slips  are  often 
found  on  otherwise  undecorated  potter}'. 

A pink-coloured  slip  was  seen  on  the  pieces  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXVII,  30,  39,  50,  51, 
54,  71, 83,  XXIX,  22,  33,  XXXII,  7,  XXXIV,  6,  10,  22,  XXXIX,  19,  and  a brown  one  on  the 
vessels  and  sherds  in  Pis.  XXVII,  32,  86,  XXIX.  16,  28,  XXXVI,  24,  XXXVIII,  5,  1 1.  In 
PI.  XXVI,  72  this  brown  slip  is  applied  over  a red  one,  while  in  Pi.  XXVIII,  60  a purple  slip 
is  used  in  the  same  way.  The  vessels  in  Pis.  XXXI,  9 XXXVII,  27  have  buff  coloured  slips. 
It  is  possible  that  the  pink  tint  of  some  of  the  slips  may  have  been  due  to  excessive  firing, 
but  it  is  usually  easy  to  see  when  this  has  occurred,  for  the  colouring  then  tends  to  be 
very  uneven. 

Red  and  cream-coloured  slips  sometimes  appear  together  on  a jar,  the  red  on  the 
upper  portion  and  the  cream  below.  As  a rule,  the  whole  jar  has  been  coated  with  the 
lighter  slip  while  it  was  still  on  the  wheel,  and  the  red  was  added  later. 

Bright  yellow  and  white  slips  decorate  the  sherd  illustrated  in  line  in  PI.  XXXIII,  6 
and  in  photograph  in  PI.  XXXM,  23.  This  sherd,  however,  originally  formed  part  of  a jar 
painted  in  polychrome  and  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  and  period  unearthed  at  Chanhu- 
daro.  It  will  be  described  later  in  the  section  dealing  with  painted  potter}-  of  this  period.^ 

The  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Period  is  adequatelv  baked  and  fairly  hard.  Very  few 
over-baked  pieces  have  been  found,  proving  that  the  Chanhu-daro  potter  knew  how  to 
manage  his  furnace.  The  great  majority  of  the  wares  are  wheel-made,  but  a considerable 
number  of  hand-made  pieces  were  also  unearthed.  Some  of  these  are  of  careful  workman- 
ship; others  were  obviously  made  and  baked  by  children. 

Trhnmino 

O 

Much  of  the  pottery  has  been  trimmed  with  some  instrument  before  being  fired. 
For  some  reason  which  is  not  yet  clear  the  potter  was  not  able  to  smooth  the  lower  part  of  a 
jar  while  it  was  on  the  wheel  and  consequently  this  portion  had  to  be  scraped,  sometimes 
very  roughly,  after  the  vessel  was  thrown.  The  wares  of  Mohenjo-daro  show  traces  also  of 
the  same  unequal  work.® 

A broken  jar  has  often  been  trimmed  by  grinding  down  the  rough  edges  so  that  it 
may  be  fit  for  use  again.  The  tops  of  the  small  vessels  seen  in  Pis.  XXVI,  60,  XXVII,  13,  16, 
23,  XXVIII,  67  and  the  base  of  the  dish  snapped  from  a food-stand  in  PI.  XXVII,  36  have 
all  been  treated  in  this  way.  Despite  the  obvious  cheapness  of  the  pottery,  it  was  evidently 
thought  worth  while  to  spend  some  time  and  trouble  on  renovating  these  small  pieces, 
rather  than  to  throw  them  away  as  useless. 

Repairs 

Examples  of  more  orthodox  repairs  have  also  been  noted.  For  instance,  the  polychrome 
sherd  in  Pi.  XXXVI,  23  has  a small  hole  close  to  one  of  its  edges,  proving  that  the  jar  of 
which  it  once  formed  a part  had  been  riveted  or  tied  together  with  thongs.  A large  storage 

’’  With  this  exception,  yellow  slips  are  only  found  on  the  Trihni  and  modern  Sindhi  wares. 

* F.  E.  M.,  pp.  179,  180. 


68 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


jar,  two  pieces  from  which  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXXVI,  4 and  XXXVII,  20,  had  also  been 
repaired  in  this  way.^ 

Sus'pended  Vessels 

Small  jars  with  holes  bored  in  their  rims  so  that  they  can  be  hung  up  are  as  well 
known  at  Chanhu-daro  as  they  were  at  Mohenjo-daro.  The  specimens  illustrated  in 
Pis.  XXVII,  84,  89, 92  and  XXXIX,  22,  have  each  a minute  hole  drilled  on  either  side. 
These  little  vessels  no  doubt  once  contained  some  kind  of  cosmetic,  and  it  was  thought 
necessary'  to  hang  them  up  to  protect  their  contents  from  mice  and  ants.  Larger  vessels, 
unless  they  were  kept  in  slings,  were  never  suspended  in  this  way. 

Ring-hases 

Most  of  the  pottery  had  flat  substantial  bases.  Some  specimens,  however,  must  have 
had  a stand  to  hold  them  upright.  Ring-hases  were  rare  at  Chanhu-daro  and  found  only 
on  the  two  large  bowls  or  pans  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXVII,  53  and  XXIX,  43  and  on  the 
little  jar  in  Pi.  XXVI,  59,  which  type  of  vessel  at  Mohenjo-daro  is  seldom  without  a base  of 
this  kind. 

Rims 

Bowls  with  wide,  flat  rims  sometimes  have  this  portion  decorated.  For  example, 
the  pieces  in  Pi.  XXVII,  nos.  39  and  41  are  painted  with  a series  of  concentric  hemispheres 
in  red,  ver}'  like  the  pattern  on  No.  19  in  PI.  XXXIX.  Transverse  lines  in  the  same  colour 
appear  round  the  rims  of  the  bowls  in  Pi.  XXVII,  8, 44.  In  the  latter  specimen  these 
lines  are  linked  together  at  the  ends,  forming  a continuous  ladder  pattern. 

Potmarks  and  Inscriptions 

Marks  and  inscriptions  were  found  on  several  jars  and  sherds.  These  are  illustrated 
in  Pis.  XXXIV,  2-4,  XXXVIL  5,  XXXVIII,  1-3,  5,  XXXIX,  24,  and  described  in  detail  below. 
The  seal  impressions  sometimes  appearing  on  the  Xlohenjo-daro  pottery  are,  however, 
unknown  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Plate  XXXIV.  No.  2,  a sherd  2.4  inches  long,  bears  an  unintelligible  sign  painted 
in  black  on  a dark  red  slip. 

No.  3 shows  more  clearly  the  two  signs  painted  in  black  on  the  small  jar  in  PI.  XXXIX, 
24.  This  little  vessel  is  6.1  inches  high  and  is  coated  with  a cream  slip.  The  first  sign 
here  often  occurs  on  the  seals  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and  was  also  found  scratched  on  the 
shoulder  of  a badly  broken  storage  jar  unearthed  in  Trench  F(  i ) at  the  level  of  — 1 3.  i feet. 
The  second  sign  is  still  untraced. 

No.  4 (see  also  PI.  XXXVII,  5)  shows  a sherd,  3.32  inches  long,  with  two  signs  painted 
in  black  on  the  natural  surface  of  the  pottery'.  The  first,  a solar  motif,  frequently  appears  on 
the  painted  wares  of  the  Harappa  civilization  (Pi.  XXXI,  9,  XXXII,  7,  etc.)  and  at  hlohenjo- 

®The  rivet  holes  were  biconical  and  about  0.15  in.  in  diameter.  They  W'ere  drilled  at  unequal 
intervals  along  the  sides  of  a crack  in  the  base  of  this  jar. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE  69 

daro  occurs  in  the  form  of  a faience  ornament/'’  The  second  sign  is  apparently  a slight 
variation  of  a well-hnowm  character  on  the  seals. 

Plate  XXXVIII.  No.  I,  a round  pottery  plaque,  2.8  inches  in  diameter  and  0.5  inch 
thick,  has  a slightly  concave  upper  surface  and  a flat  base.  On  the  former  is  scratched  a 
pentacle— the  first  known  appearance  of  this  sign  on  an  object  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 
This  still  serves  as  a magic  symbol  in  India  to-day,”  and  one  authority  states  that  it  is  derived 
from  one  of  the  Eiiyhorhias,  which  has  pistils  of  similar  form.”  Any  motif  in  which  a 
triangle  may  be  traced  is  regarded  with  special  favour  in  India.  The  goddess  Mariyamma 
is  said  to  have  one  of  her  dwellings  in  a triangle,”  while  Abbott  states  that  the  pentacle 
itself  is  used  in  India  as  a charm  against  the  Evil  Eye.^^  It  may,  therefore,  be  assumed  with 
some  authority  that  the  pentacle  incised  on  this  plaque  had  some  magic  or  religious  signifi- 
cance, although  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  the  plaque  itself  was  used. 

The  pentacle  occurs  occasionally  on  Sumerian  seals,”  and  it  appears  several  times  on 
clay  tablets  from  Jemdet  Nasr  and  is  painted  also  on  a jar  from  the  same  site.”  It  is  por- 
trayed as  a five-pointed  star  with  the  interior  filled  in  at  Tepe  Giyan,”  and,  in  its  strictly 
linear  form,  is  a symbol  which  has  been  used  in  Palestine  from  ancient  times  down  to  the 
present  day.”  It  has  come  to  light  in  countries  as  widely  separated  as  Nubia  ” and  Greece. 

The  extreme  rarity  of  this  symbol  as  regards  the  art  of  the  Indus  Valley  leads  us  to 
assume  that  it  was  borrowed  from  another  country',  probably  Mesopotamia,  where,  as  has 
been  pointed  out,  it  was  fairly  common.  Again,  it  may  have  entered  India  from  Baluchistan 
(although  it  occurs  rarely  on  the  pottery  of  that  country  '’),  and  have  become  identified  later 
with  part  of  a sacred  plant. 

The  pentacle  is  ver)’  common  in  China  where  it  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  many  symbols 
of  longevity,  perhaps  because  the  design,  when  properly  executed,  has  no  beginning  or  end. 
Its  efficacy  against  the  Evil  Eye  is  said  to  be  thwarted  if  it  is  not  drawn  without  a stop. 

Plate  XXXVIII.  No.  2 is  a sherd  7 inches  long.  This  came  from  a large  jar  and  has  a 
double  triangle  motif  which  was  deeply  incised  upon  it  while  the  clay  was  wet.  It  is  unlikely 
that  this  particular  mark  had  any  connection  with  the  double-axe  cult  object  of  Minoan 

F.  E.  AL,  pi.  CXI,  1 1,  23,  24. 

^^The  symbol  occurs  on  punch-marked  silver  coins;  J.  Allen,  Ancient  Indian  Coins  CCat.  Brit. 
Ahts.),  1936,  Index  IV,  p.  7. 

Various  species  of  this  plant  are  regarded  as  sacred  in  many  parts  of  India. 

Oppert,  Original  Inhabitants  of  India,  p.  483. 

^*The  Keys  of  Power,  p.  136. 

Ward,  Seal  Cylinders  of  Western  Asia.  p.  134,  fig.  377;  Legrain,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  Ill,  pi. 
37,  figs.  105,  227,  239,  398,  400. 

^''Langdon,  Oxford  Editions  of  Citneifonn  Texts,  vol.  VII,  pis,  I,  III,  VI,  etc.;  Mackay,  Anthrop- 
ology Memoirs,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  vol.  I,  pi.  LXVIII,  1 1. 

Contenau  et  Ghirshman,  Foitilles  da  Tepe  Giyan,  pi.  66. 

It  is  scratched  on  a potsherd  from  Ezion-Geber,  Illust.  Lon.  News,  Aug.  5,  1939.  p.  247,  fig.  5. 

Liv.  Ann.  Arch,  and  Anthrop.,  vol.  VIII,  pi.  XIV.  It  is  also  found  as  a potmark  on  a prehistoric 
jar  from  Egt-pt;  see  Petrie,  The  Making  of  Egypt,  pi.  XXXI,  64. 

Swindler,  Ancient  Painting,  fig.  210. 

Stein,  A'lem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  37,  pi.  XI. 


70 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Crete,  for  the  same  design  often  appears  on  the  painted  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture 
(see  Pi.  XXXVII,  7),  where  triangular  devices  are  very  common.  An  exactly  similar  double 
triangle  was  found  scratched  on  the  base  of  a badly  broken  jar  from  Chanhu-daro,‘"  and 
the  same  motif  also  appears  on  some  of  the  seals  from  Mohenjo-daro; it  is,  therefore, 
not  surprising  to  find  it  used  as  a pot-mark.  It  also  served  the  same  purpose  on  prehistoric 
Egyptian  pottery.^^ 

No.  3 shows  a sherd  from  a jar-stand,  6.6  inches  in  length.  This  also  bears  a true 
pot-mark  for  the  signs  were  impressed  upon  it  when  the  clay  was  damp.  Three  devices 
are  now  visible,  two  of  which  are  familiar  as  they  appear  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  seals, but 
the  third,  on  the  right,  is  far  from  clear  and  looks  like  an  animal.  We  may  have  in  these 
three  pictographs  and  others  that  possibly  followed  them  the  name  of  the  owner  of  this 
piece  of  pottery. 

No.  5 comes  from  the  side  of  a large  pottery’  jar  and  the  signs  upon  it  were  scratched 
after  it  had  been  fired.  The  “ V ’’-shaped  device  on  the  left  often  precedes  inscriptions 
both  on  seals  and  pottery;  its  meaning  is  unknown.  It  is  followed  by  groups  of  upright 
strokes  numbering  twelve  in  all,  but  here  again  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  they  represent. 
Below  all  is  an  oval  motif,  which  may  be  an  unfinished  form  of  a common  type  of  sign  that 
appears  on  the  seals  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Kilns 

No  kilns  that  could  have  been  used  for  pottery  have  as  yet  come  to  light  at  Chanhu- 
daro,  probably  because  they  were  placed  well  outside  the  city.  Should  they  be  discovered 
later,  however,  they  are  almost  certain  to  be  of  the  same  type  as  those  already  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro."’ 

INCISED  WARES 

Most  of  the  examples  of  incised  work  consist  of  fragments  of  the  dishes  of  food-stands, 
of  the  kind  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXV,  1-6.  In  the  specimens  shown  in  Pi.  XXXVIII,  12-21, 
23,  25,  the  incised  patterns  have  rather  the  effect  of  being  in  relief,  but  no  raised  work  of 
any  kind  occurs  on  any  of  the  Harappa  wares,  except  on  one  particular  type  of  vessel  which 
has  not  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro.'® 

The  patterns  on  the  sherds  Nos.  14,  16,  21  in  Pi.  XXXVIII  are  made  up  of  thin,  spiral 
lines  whose  regularity  suggests  that  they  were  cut  before  the  dishes  were  removed  from  the 
wheel.  The  spaces  between  the  spirals  were  then  filled  in  with  short  strokes  so  as  to  form 
a number  of  cells  or  partitions.  The  most  carefully  executed  design  is  that  on  sherd  No.  14, 

--  No.  1249.  Unearthed  at  the  level  of  — 5.3  ft.  in  Trench  K(0. 

Smith  and  Gadd,  M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXIII  (c.xxxix,  cxl). 

-*  Petrie,  The  Making  of  Egypt,  pis.  VII,  30,  XVTII,  88,  XIII,  56. 

==  M.  I.  C.,  pis.  CXXIII  (clix),  CXXVI  (cclx.xix). 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXIII,  3, 4. 

Op.  cit.,  p.  177;  pi.  L,  b,  d. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  LXVI,  54. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


71 


where  the  pattern  resembles  the  interior  of  a large  shell  of  the  ammonite  type; it  is  hardly 
angular  enough  to  have  heen  copied  from  a spider’s  web. 

No.  15  in  Pl.XXXVIII,  which  measures  5.1  inches  across,  hears  a curious  ornament 
consisting  of  a number  of  small  semi-spirals  arranged  rather  irregularly  in  concentric  circles. 
These  appear  to  have  been  impressed  either  with  the  end  of  a tube  having  overlapping 
edges  or  with  the  mouth  of  a small  univalve  shell. 

The  simple  design  on  No.  12  consists  of  several  crescent-shaped  markings  set  in  circles. 
The  same  markings  appear  again  on  No.  25,  where  they  are  associated  with  a spiral  line. 

The  only  painted  example  of  this  shell-like  pattern  occurs  on  a sherd  from  Mohenjo- 
daro.^°  The  ornament  is  peculiar  to  the  time  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and  is,  therefore,  of 
great  assistance  when  material  has  to  he  dated,  but  it  is  difficult  to  explain  why  it  should 
appear  only  on  the  dishes  of  food-stands.  The  device  may,  of  course,  be  a sacred  one  and 
the  stands  on  which  it  alone  appears  have  been  reserved  for  religious  use.  Ihe  patterns 
obviously  bear  a close  relationship  to  one  another  and  must  have  taken  some  time  to 
execute;  each  stroke  was  put  in  separately  by  hand. 

Similar  incised  designs  on  fragments  of  the  dishes  of  food-stands  come  from  the  lower 
levels  of  Mohenjo-daro,^^  and  Mr.  Majumdar  has  discovered  sherds  marked  in  the  same 
way  in  other  parts  of  Sindh.®'  A few  sherds  marked  in  the  same  way  have  even  appeared  in 
Baluchistan,®®  where  their  presence  mav  denote  the  existence  of  trade  relations  between  the 
people  of  that  province  and  those  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  equally 
possible  that  this  potter)'  formed  part  of  the  personal  belongings  of  merchants  from  India, 
who  would  include  in  their  baggage  any  objects  needed  for  their  religious  observances. 

These  incised  dishes  were  also  embellished  with  colour.  Nos.  1 3,  14, 19,  20,  23  in 
Pl.XXXVIII  have  red  bands  painted  round  their  inner  margins,  while  Nos.  19  and  23  are 
edged  with  black.  A cream-coloured  slip  improves  the  appearance  of  No.  25,  while  the 
backs  of  Nos.  13, 14,  16-18,21  are  washed  over  with  red.  Nos.  12  and  15  are  of  grey- 
coloured  ware. 

Incised  dishes  of  this  tvpe  occur  solely  in  the  Harappa  II  and  III  occupations  at 
Chanhu-daro,  whereas,  as  already  stated,  they  have  been  found  in  the  lower  levels  of 
Mohenjo-daro  only.  This  appears  to  indicate  that  Chanhu-daro  was  deserted  by  the 
Harappa  people  some  time  before  the  same  fate  overcame  the  sister  city  to  the  north-west. 
This  question  of  the  relative  age  of  the  two  cities  will  be  referred  to  later  when  objects  other 
than  pottery  are  being  discussed. 

Nos.  8 and  9 in  Pi.  XXXMII  are  portions  of  the  bases  of  two  large  pans,  similar  to 
the  specimen  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXIV,  2.  The  first,  which  measures  16.5  inches  across,  bears 
a series  of  intersecting  circles  deeply  incised  with  a notched  tool.  The  circles  are  so  carefully 

A particular  fossil  shell  of  ammonite  form  (saligram)  is  revered  by  many  Brahmans  today. 

F.  E.  AI.,  pi.  LXX,  39.  This  once  formed  part  of  a dish  of  a food-stand. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  LXVII. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  pis.  XXII,  48,  XXXI,  7-10,  14-16. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Snrv.  hid.,  XT.  43,  pis.  XXI  (Kul.  I),  XXX  (Alehi.  II,  4.4).  The  Mehi- 
damb  example  makes  the  fossil  origin  of  this  pattern  almost  a certainty. 


72 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


drawn  that  it  is  probable  that  the  design  was  sketched  in  beforehand.  The  roundels  in 
the  centre  of  each  were  possibly  impressed  with  the  rim  of  a small  jar.  The  simpler  pattern 
on  No.  9 again  shows  careful  work.  Here  the  impressions,  each  2.1  inches  in  diameter, 
have  been  stamped  with  some  round  object.^’*  Other  sites  in  Sindh  have  also  produced 
this  curious  pan  decoration. 

It  is  not  known  why  these  large  pans  were  thus  decorated,  or  to  what  use  they  were  put. 
Clothes  may  have  been  washed  in  them;  the  rubbing  of  the  garments  on  the  rough  surface 
made  by  the  pattern  on  the  base  of  the  pan  would  perhaps  help  to  remove  the  dirt.  Again, 
they  may  have  been  used  for  hulling  grain  or  for  preparing  w'afer  bread,  which  would 
thus  become  impressed  with  a pattern. 

No.  22  in  Pi.  XXXVIII  is  part  of  the  lower  portion  of  a storage  jar  which  was  thickly 
coated  with  a mixture  of  sand  and  clay.  This  coating  was  then  removed  in  sections,  so  as 
to  leave  a series  of  thick  lines  in  slight  relief.  Water  vessels  still  retain  in  Sindh  today  this 
sandy  layer  which  is  supposed  to  help  keep  the  contents  of  a jar  cool. 

No.  24,  which  measures  4.2  inches  long,  is  part  of  the  neck  and  shoulder  of  a large  jar 
impressed  with  shallow  zig-zag  lines  made  with  a blunt  point.  No.  28,  a portion  of  a 
storage  jar,  is  decorated  in  the  same  way. 

RESERVED  SLIP  WARE 

At  Mohenjo-daro  several  pottery  sherds  were  found  which  could  be  compared  with 
certain  w'ares  from  Kish  and  Ur  in  the  treatment  of  their  slips. Three  specimens  of  the 
same  kind  of  pottery  were  found,  two  in  early  levels  at  Chanhu-daro,  and  are  illustrated  in 
Pi.  XXXVIII,  26,  27,  29.  The  first  sherd,  a very  thin  one,  3.6  inches  in  length,  has  been 
coated  with  a pink  slip  which  has  then  been  removed  in  places  with  a comb-like  tool  to  allow 
the  body  colour  of  the  pottery  to  show  through.  The  contrast  here  is  not  ver)'  marked,  but 
it  appears  to  greater  advantage  in  No.  27.  This  piece  was  covered  first  with  a dark,  almost 
black,  slip  and  then  with  another  of  a light  grey  colour.  The  top  slip  has  been  partly 
removed  in  lines  to  reveal  the  darker  one  beneath.  No.  29  comes  from  a jar  that  has  been 
over-fired.  The  upper  slip  is  purplish-black,  but  the  one  below  it  is  now  of  a somewhat 
indefinite  shade.  In  places  it  is  light  green,  though  originally  it  may  have  been  cream- 
coloured.  The  dark  slip  here  has  been  removed  in  two  directions,  the  regularity  of  the 
lines  showing  that  a notched  instrument  was  used  for  this  purpose. 

The  great  rarity  of  this  reserved  slip  ware  suggests  that  it  was  imported  from  other 
countries.  Sir  Leonard  Woolley  has  stated  that  some  specimens  found  by  him  in  the  lowest 
levels  at  Ur®'  may  have  come  from  Anatolia.  Reserved  slip  ware,  carried  out  in  glaze,  has 
been  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro,®*  but  no  examples  are  known  from  other  sites. 

Compare  this  pattern  with  those  in  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVII,  21,  24. 

Majumdar,  Ex-plorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXXI,  17,  18. 

F.  E.  AL,  pp.  45;  184, 188, 652,  668;  pi.  LXVII,  3, 4. 

^’’Antiquaries  Journal,  vol.  X,  pp.  331,  339.  There  is,  however,  a slight  difference  between  the 
Ur  and  the  Indian  wares.  At  Ur  only  one  slip  was  used,  whereas  at  Chanhu-daro  and  at  Mohenjo-daro 
two  slips  are,  with  one  exception,  always  employed. 

Al.  I.  C.,  pp.  578,  692;  pi.  CLIX,  I. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CUETURE 


73 


CUT  WARE 

Nos.  6,  7,  lo,  II  in  PI.  XXXVIII  are  portions  of  pottery  vessels  or  stands  in  which 
triangular  holes  have  been  cut.  This  form  of  decoration  is  also  known  at  Mohenjo-daroT 
but  neither  there,  nor  at  Chanhu-daro,  have  anything  like  complete  specimens  been  found. 
Examples  from  Mesopotamia,  however,  may  provide  some  clue  to  the  shape  of  the  objects 
from  which  our  sherds  have  come.  The  tall  pottery  stands,  some  of  hour-glass  shape 
ornamented  with  triangular  holes,  which  have  appeared  at  Kish  and  other  Sumerian 
sites,^^  may  well  be  the  prototypes  of  this  Chanhu-daro  pottery.  The  sherds  we  illustrate 
are  all  slightly  eurved  and  cannot,  therefore,  he  parts  of  ventilators  or  gratings.  No.  7 is 
coated  with  a cream-coloured  and  No.  1 1 with  a brown  slip;  the  remaining  two  have  no 
slip  at  all. 

The  holes  in  all  four  sherds  have  been  cut  with  some  sharp  instrument,  but  this  has 
not  always  been  carefully  done,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  in  some  cases  guiding  marks  are 
still  visible  lightly  incised  on  the  surface  of  the  potter^c^" 

This  particular  form  of  ornamentation  was  not  conhned  to  India  or  Alesopotamia.  It 
was  practised  at  Susa,^®  appears  on  very  early  jar-stands  and  altars  from  Egypt,^^  while 
various  potter}'  objects  from  Palestine  have  also  been  treated  in  the  same  way.  In  Meso- 
potamia, however,  the  practice  was  especially  common.  Here  specimens  have  come  to 
light  which  are  contemporary  with  the  Harappa  Period,  while  others  have  been  found  which 
antedate  it.'*"  In  some  cases  the  holes  appear  to  be  purely  ornamental,  but  where  they  occur 
in  stands  for  water-jars,  they  would  also  serve  for  ventilation. 

PLAIN  AND  SIMPLE  PAINTED  POTTERY 

In  the  following  description  of  the  pottery  from  Chanhu-daro,  I shall  continue  to 
use  the  same  svstem  adopted  in  the  Mohenjo-daro  reports,  i.  e.,  each  jar  is  classified  under 
a letter  according  to  its  form  and  under  a double  letter  if  the  type  is  divergent.  This 
procedure  will,  I hope,  assist  the  reader  to  compare  the  wares  from  the  two  cities  as  far  as  it 
is  possible  to  do  so.  Certain  tvpes  found  in  one  city,  however,  have  no  counterparts  in  the 
other  and  potters  often  appear  to  have  been  influenced  by  purely  local  fashions. 

We  have  yet  to  And  a Chanhu-daro,  for  instance,  a very  coarse  type  of  pottery  (Type  B) 
which  was  very  common  at  i\ lohenjo-daro.  The  vessels  in  Pis.  XX\d,  73,  a and  XXIX,  36,  a 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVII. 

■‘“Watelin,  Excavations  at  Kish,  vol.  IV,  pis.  I,  XVI,  6;  Langdon,  Joiirn.  Roy.  As.  Soc.,  1930, 
pi.  IX.  4- 

The  triangular  incisions  on  some  stands  from  Tell  Asmar  do  not  pierce  the  pottery  and  were, 
perhaps,  intended  to  hold  inlays;  Frankfort,  Orient.  Inst.  Conimimications,  Chicago,  No.  20, 
pi.  II,  12,  13. 

These  can  be  clearly  seen  in  No.  1 1 , which  measures  3.8  ins.  across. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  ts.  VIII,  pp.  80,  137;  XX,  p.  1 14. 

«Quibell,  Hierakono-polis,  I,  pi.  XXXV.  4.  For  other  Egyptian  examples  see  De  Morgan.  La 
Prehistoire  Orientale,  II,  p.  285. 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V.,  pp.  37-39;  ph  XXI. 


74 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


bear  some  resemblance  to  it,  although  they  are  far  superior  in  workmanship.  Both  these 
vessels  come  from  the  top  of  Mound  I,  the  last  area  of  the  city  to  be  occupied  by  people  of 
the  Harappa  Culture.  Again  the  tall  conical  cups  shown  in  Pi.  XXIX,  5-1 1 cannot  be 
paralleled  at  Mohenjo-daro,  where  another  type  of  vessel  took  its  place. 

Type  A (Pis.  XXV,  j-42,  XXYII,  36,  XXV77Z,  31,  XXXVlll,  12-21,  23,  25) 

Few  of  these  pottery  food-stands  have  been  found  intact,  the  thin-stemmed  variety  with 
a hroad  base  being  especially  subject  to  damage.  We  have  found  more  dishes  and  bowls 
belonging  to  these  food-stands  than  the  stems  and  bases  that  supported  them,  for  the 
reason  that  the  former  could  he  put  to  other  uses,  whereas  the  latter  on  separation  became 
worthless.  The  dish  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXVII,  36  is  a case  in  point,  for  after  it  had  become 
parted  from  its  stand,  its  base  was  ground  down  smooth  and  it  was  set  to  other  purposes. 
The  tall  stands  were  exceptionally  weak  at  the  junction  of  dish  and  stem,  for  these  two 
parts  had  to  be  made  separately  and  then  luted  together  with  clay.  Various  attempts  were 
made,  such  as  roughening  the  surfaces  to  be  joined  to  strengthen  this  weak  spot  but  not 
always  with  satisfactory  results.^® 

This  type  of  utensil  was  probably  used  to  hold  special  foods,  fruits,  and  so  forth,  like 
its  modern  counterpart.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  have  been  used  in  marketing,  for  vessels 
of  exactly  similar  form  are  carried  about  on  the  head  in  Bali  at  the  present  time,  for  which 
see  the  photograph  in  Pi.  XCIII,  31.  The  hollow  base  of  the  stand  hts  the  crown  of  the 
head  very  comfortably. 

The  stands  from  Chanhu-daro  fall  naturally  into  two  groups: 

(a)  Tall  stands  with  slender  stems  as  in  Pis.  XXV,  1,3,7,9,10,  13-16,  19,21,22,26, 

27,  XXVII,  36. 

(b)  Stands  of  squat  form  as  in  Pi.  XXV,  2, 4-6, 8,  1 1, 12, 17, 18, 20, 23-25,  29. 

The  latter  type,  being  the  more  substantial,  is  the  one  most  frequently  found  complete. 

Tall  Stand.  A carefully  polished  red  slip,  light  or  dark  in  colour,  covers  the  tall  stands 
(or  parts  of  them)  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXV,  i,  10, 19,  21, 27,  XXVII,  36,  while  a red  pigment 
is  spread  rather  more  roughly  over  the  surfaces  of  Nos.  3,  7, 1 5 in  PI.  XXV  and  of  No.  3 1 in 
PI.  XXVIII.  The  dishes  shown  in  Pi.  XXV,  9,  16  are  of  grey  ware,  the  first  being  coated  with 
a polished  black  slip  and  the  second  with  one  of  very  dark  grey.  A cream-coloured  wash 
improves  the  appearance  of  No.  26  in  Pi.  XXV,  but  No.  22  in  the  same  plate  has  no 
slip  at  all. 

Various  differences  can  be  observed  in  the  stems  of  the  taller  stands.  No.  19  in  Pi.  XXV 
seems  to  have  been  severely  plain,  but  Nos.  15,  16, 21, 27  have  their  upper  portions 
moulded. 

It  is  unusual  to  find  traces  of  painting  on  these  tall  stands,  apart  from  the  coloured 
slips  and  washes  already  described.  No.  1 5 in  Pi.  XXV  is  ornamented  with  black  lines, 
while  No.  14  has  the  inside  of  its  rim  decorated  with  three  equidistant  groups  of  multiple 
loops  in  black. 

For  an  example  of  such  roughening,  see  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVII,  14. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


75 


The  shapes  of  the  dishes  themselves  vary  considerably.  The  bowElike  forms  in 
Pis.  XXV,  9,  14,26,  XXVIII,  3 1 could  have  held  but  little  and  may  have  been  used  for 
incense.  The  carination  of  No.  9 suggests  that  it  may  once  have  had  a cover. 

Squat  Stands.  These  are  hnished  in  various  ways.  Most  of  them  are  covered  with  a 
red  slip,  which  is  sometimes  highly  polished.  Others  are  cream-coloured  and  two  (Pi.  XXV, 
8,  20)  are  without  a slip  at  all.  The  exceptionally  fine  specimen  in  PI.  XXV,  23  is  coloured 
red  outside  and  partly  so  within  and  thin  black  lines  further  ornament  its  foot.  No.  1 8 in 
PI.  XXV  is  of  grey  ware  showing  horizontal  polish  markings.  No.  20  is  quite  plain  except 
for  a red  circular  band  inside  the  dish  and  red  lines  round  its  rim  and  the  edge  of  its  base. 

Incised  patterns  appear  on  what  are  left  of  the  dishes  that  surmount  the  stands  in 
PI.  XXV,  II,  16,  17.  The  designs  on  Nos.  1 1,  16  take  the  form  of  a series  of  radiating  lines 
cut  jerkily  with  some  sharp  point  and  producing  a notched  effect  very  much  like  that  on  a 
similar  dish  in  PI.  XXXVIII,  18.  No.  17  in  PI.  XXV  is  decorated  inside  with  a spiral  line 
made  up  of  semi-circular  markings.  Mention  has  already  been  made  in  the  preceding  section 
on  “ Incised  Wares  ” of  the  patterns  that  are  so  frequently  found  on  these  food-stand  dishes. 

More  decoration  appears  on  the  squat  food-stands  than  on  the  tall  variety.  The  outside 
of  No.  5 in  PI.  XXV  is  ornamented  with  the  sun-motif  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIII,  15.  This 
is  painted  in  black  and  contrasts  well  with  the  red  slip  covering  the  dish.  No.  25  in  the 
same  plate  has  a light  red  slip  which  is  embellished  with  grouped  lines  in  black  and  a narrow 
band  of  leaf-like  motifs.  No.  29  is  decorated  on  the  outside  with  roughly  executed  lines, 
loops,  and  ladder  patterns,  carried  out  in  black  on  a red  slip.  The  sherds  seen  in  Pis. 
XXX,  12,  XXXIII,  7,  15,  XXXIV,  7,  all  painted  in  black  on  red,  are  portions  of  food-stands, 
probably  of  the  squat  type. 

The  model  stand  No.  24  in  Pi.  XXV  is  hand-made  and  from  its  rough  workmanship 
was  apparently  made  by  a child. 

Type  B (Pis.  XXVI,  73,  a,  XXIX,  36,  a) 

The  late,  degraded  form  of  this  type,  so  common  at  Mohenjo-daro  is  unknown  at 
Chanhu-daro.  The  two  specimens  illustrated  here  come  from  the  summit  of  Mound  I.  They 
are  ornamented  with  scored  spiral  lines  and  can  only  just  stand  on  their  narrow  bases. 

Type  C (Pis.  XXVIII,  42,  XXIX,  16, 25-36) 

This  type  of  cup  with  its  thick  walls  and  base  was  far  more  common  at  Mohenjo-daro. 
No.  16  in  Pi.  XXIX  is  thinner  than  most  specimens,  especially  in  its  lower  part.  It  is  coated 
with  a brown-coloured  w'ash  which  extends  well  down  inside  it.  No.  32  is  uncommon 
on  account  of  its  red  slip,  cream  being  the  colour  most  often  met  w'ith  on  these  vessels. 

Type  D (PI.  XXVI,  59) 

No.  59  in  PI.  XXVI  resembles  ver\'  closely  those  found  at  Mohenjo-daro  except  that 
it  lacks  a beading  round  the  base.  It  has  a ring  base  and  has  been  washed  over  with  a 
light  red  paint. 

F.  E.  AI.,  pi.  LX,  14-17. 


76  CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Tyfe  DA  (PI  XXVU,  52] 

The  single  example  of  this  type  is  coated  with  a light  red  slip  on  the  upper  part  only 
Jars  of  this  shape  were  also  rare  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

Type  E (Pis.  XXVI,  6s,  68,  XXVIII,  i,  10,  1 1,  37,  4s,  XXIX,  4) 

The  shelf  at  the  junction  of  neck  and  shoulder  is  characteristic  of  this  type  of  pottery, 
otherwise  the  specimens  differ  slightly  in  form.  The  moulded  foot  of  No.  68  in  Pi.  XXVI 
marks  a new  departure  from  the  plain  bases  of  these  rather  uninteresting  vessels.  The 
same  shelf  formation  appears  in  the  storage  jars  illustrated  in  PI.  XXIV,  3,  4,  6,  7. 

Type  EA  (PL  XXVIII,  3) 

This  jar  resembles  the  preceding  type  closely,  except  that  the  shelf  is  missing.  The 
jar  we  show  is  extremely  well  made  and  is  ornamented  with  thin,  black  lines  on  a light 
red  slip. 

Type  F (Pis.  XXVII,  62,  66,  67,  XXVIII,  13) 

The  main  features  of  this  type  are  the  heading  at  the  junction  of  neck  and  shoulder 
and  the  differently  coloured  upper  and  lower  portions.  All  the  jars  illustrated  are  painted 
red  above  and,  with  the  e.xception  of  No.  62,  cream  below.  The  red  slip  on  No.  67  still  bears 
traces  of  its  original  polish. 


Type  G (Pis.  XXVI,  88-gi,  XXVIII,  4, 6, 19, 21, 24, 29, 36,46, 50, 53, 54,  XXIX,  1-3) 

Jars  belonging  to  this  type  are  full-bodied,  with  wide  mouths  and  substantial  flat  bases. 
The  two  jars  in  Pis.  XXVIII,  50  and  XXIX,  3 are  grey  in  colour,  the  last  bearing  traces  of  a 
black  slip.  Nos.  4 and  6 in  Pi.  XXVIII  are  decorated  with  incised  spiral  lines.  Vessels  of 
this  shape  must  have  had  a great  many  uses  and  were  probably  turned  out  in  large 
quantities. 


Type  H (Pi.  XXVlll,  15-17,  20,  26,  27, 30,  51,  52) 

These  vessels  in  general  resemble  Type  C but  are  squatter  in  form.  The  smaller 
sizes  are  found  in  such  numbers  that  it  seems  likely  they  were  stocked  by  shop-keepers  who 
used  them  as  containers  for  small  purchases  of  cooking  oil,  etc.  They  are  always  of  rough 
workmanship  and  usually  have  no  slip.  Their  flat  bases  nearly  always  show  the  marks  of 
the  string  that  was  used  to  sever  them  from  the  wheel. 


Type  I (PI.  XXVII,  89,  po) 

These  little  jars  with  their  flared  mouths  and  curious  bases  are  rare.  No.  89  which  is 
without  a slip  has  two  holes  in  its  rim  and  is  one  of  the  “ Suspended  Vessels  ” already 
described.  No.  90  is  decorated  with  black  lines  on  a dark  red  slip  and  the  usual  flared  lip 
is  missing.^® 


I have  not  been  able  to  e.xamine  this  jar  again  but  I suspect  that  its  rim  had  been  broken  and  the 
rough  edges  then  rubbed  smooth. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


77 


Type  ] (Pis.  XXVII,  69,  70,  74-87,  91,92,  XXVIII,  9,  XXXIII,  4,  XXXVII,  6,  XXXIX, 
22,  26,  27) 


Many  of  these  small,  narrow-mouthed  jars  are  ornamented  with  simple  black  or  red 
lines.  They  differ  considerably  in  shape. 

No.  69  is  hand-made  and  has  four  small  openings  instead  of  one.  Nos.  73  and  92  are 
also  illustrated  in  photograph  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  22, 26.  The  hrst  is  a beautiful  little  vessel 
decorated  in  black  on  a cream-coloured  slip  and  the  latter  is  a hand-made  jar  of  grey  paste, 
the  surface  of  which  shows  vertical  polish  marks.  Its  carinated  top  is  pierced  with  two 
small  holes  by  which  it  was  suspended. 

No.  9 in  PI.  XXVIII  comes  under  this  type  letter  owing  to  its  narrow  mouth,  though 
it  is  hard  to  say  whether  our  restoration  of  its  rim  and  neck  is  a correct  one.  No.  4 in 
Pi.  XXXIII  is  a rim  of  one  of  these  small  mouthed  vessels  wEose  aperture  is  only  0.24  inch. 
It  is  quaintly  ornamented  with  four  fishes.  A similar  top  is  shown  in  PI.  XXXVII,  6.  The 
motif  here  may  represent  a five-petalled  flower  or  the  jar  painter  may  have  likened  its 
concave  top  to  one  of  the  Convolvulacea  and  added  the  dark  markings  to  heighten  the 
resemblance.  These  two  last  pieces  are  painted  in  black  on  a polished  red  slip. 

The  hand-made  vessel  No.  79  in  Pi.  XXVII  is  probably  a model  cage.  It  bears  a lattice 
pattern  in  red  painted  on  the  natural  surface  of  the  pottery  and  the  only  opening  is  a small 
hole,  0.55  inch  in  diameter,  on  one  side  of  the  knob  on  the  top.  No.  27  in  Pi.  XXXIX  is  a 
photograph  of  an  almost  identical  article.  This  last  is  3.2  inches  high  (about  half-an-inch 
higher  than  the  first  specimen)  and  is  also  hand-made.  Its  ornamentation  is  similar  to 
the  first  except  that  a cream  slip  has  been  used."*® 

Very  similar  cages  have  been  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro,^°  and  a specimen  containing 
the  model  of  a bird  is  known  from  the  same  site.'^  The  Chanhu-daro  objects  may,  therefore, 
be  only  models  of  bird-cages.  On  the  other  hand,  the  apertures  in  their  tops  are  just  wide 
enough  to  admit  an  insect  about  the  size  of  a cricket,  and  they  may  have  been  used  to 
accommodate  this  musical  creature. 

The  ordinar)'  narrow-mouthed  jars  appear  to  have  been  mostly  used  for  eye-paints. 
Some  contained  a black  powder  which,  on  analysis,  proved  to  be  some  kind  of  soot.“ 


Type  ]A  (PI.  XXVII,  7 1-73) 

This  sub-type  with  its  bulbous,  almost  carinated  body  and  deeply  recessed  mouth  is 
rare.  No.  71  is  roughly  ornamented  with  wav)'  lines  carried  out  in  red  on  a pink  slip.  A 
red  wash  covers  No.  72  and  No.  73  is  crudely  painted  in  black  on  a cream-coloured  slip. 


Types  K and  KA 

No  examples  of  these  rare  types  have,  as  yet,  come  to  light  at  Chanhu-daro. 


Certain  cracks  in  the  cage  suggest  that  it  was  made  on  the  coil  system. 
I.C.,  pi.  LXXXIV,  1,2. 

“ F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXXI,  6. 

See  Chap.  XV. 


78  CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 

TypeL(Pl.XXVll,6i) 

Possibly  this  squat  carinated  vessel  may  belong  to  tbis  type,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
classify  owing  to  its  missing  upper  portion.  The  jar  is  well  made  and  is  decorated  with 
dark  red  bands  on  a light  red  slip. 

Type  LA  (PI.  XXIX,  38-40, 43,  a) 

These  curiously  formed  vessels  with  narrow  mouths  and  bases  are  well  represented 
at  Chanhu-daro.  The  first  three  are  coated  with  a red  and  the  last  with  a cream  slip.  Their 
narrow  apertures  indicate  that  they  were  made  to  contain  liquids  and  their  bases  are  too 
unstable  for  them  to  have  held  anything  safely  without  the  support  of  a stand. 

Type  M (Pi.  XXV,  30,  50,  57) 

Bowls  set  on  a short  foot,  either  solid  or  hollow,  were  fairly  common  at  Mohenjo-daro, 
but  do  not  appear  to  have  been  popular  with  the  Chanhu-daro  inhabitants.  The  hand- 
made example  No.  30  has  no  slip  and  is  possibly  the  work  of  a child.  No.  50  is  roughly 
finished  and  also  has  no  slip  on  the  outside.  Inside  it  is  coated  with  red,  and  a ladder  pattern 
in  dark  red  decorates  the  top  of  its  rim.  The  upper  portion  of  the  fine  bowl  No.  57  is 
unfortunately  missing.  It  had  been  washed  over  with  a cream-coloured  slip  and  bears 
inside  an  incised  pattern  of  lunar-shaped  markings  arranged  in  concentric  circles.  Incised 
work  of  this  kind  is  usually  confined  to  Type  A wares. 

Type  MA  (Pis.  XXV,  43-49>5^-53>  XXVIII,  59, 65) 

These  vessels  generally  have  hollow  feet,  but  unlike  Type  M their  upper  parts  are  taller 
and  resemble  jars  rather  than  bowls;  moreover,  they  vary  considerably  in  shape.  This  type 
was  common  at  Alohenjo-daro. 

Nos.  43,  46,  48,  and  53  in  PI.  XXV  are  decorated  with  red  bands,  either  on  a cream 
slip  or  on  the  natural  surface  of  the  potter}'.  The  last-named  is  hand-made.  No.  59  in 
PI.  XXVIII  has  lost  its  foot,  but  there  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  it  belongs  to  this  type. 
It  is  roughly  painted  with  intermixed  black  and  red  lines  laid  directly  on  the  surface  of 
the  pottery. 

Type  N 

A rare  jar  from  Mohenjo-daro  has  the  low'er  part  of  its  body  strongly  incurved  to  enable 
it  to  sit  securely  on  a stand.”  No  duplicate  of  this  type  has  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro, 
though,  as  Pi.  XXIV  shows,  incurv'ed  bases  do  occur  on  some  of  the  storage  jars. 

Types  P and  Q 

These  types  are  not  represented  at  Chanhu-daro. 


M.  I.  C.,  pi.  LXXXI,  32. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


79 


Type  R (Pis.  XXIX,  41, 42, 44-46,  XXXIX,  24) 

The  examples  found  of  this  graceful  and  distinctive  type  are  not  so  well  finished  as 
those  from  Mohenjo-daro.  At  that  city  they  were  sometimes  painted  in  polychrome  and  also 
copied  in  silver  and  copper.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  vessels  of  this  type  were  used  for 
ritual  purposes. 

Type  S 

This  type  is  unknown  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  SA  (Pis.  XXVI,  69, 70,  XXVUl,  22) 

A very  uncommon  type.  The  three  specimens  we  show  have  their  lower  portions 
extensively  trimmed  and  are  covered  with  cream-coloured  slips. 

Type  SB  (PI.  XXVI,  72) 

As  this  jar  has  lost  its  rim  there  is  a little  uncertainty  whether  it  should  be  included 
under  this  type  letter  or  not.  It  had  evidently  been  used  as  a water-jar,  for  it  is  coated  first 
with  a red  and  then  with  a brown  slip,  evidently  to  make  it  water-tight.'*^ 

Type  U (PI.  XXVII,  1-6,  22,  24,  27) 

These  shallow  dishes,  all  of  rough  workmanship,  and,  with  one  exception,  without 
slips,  are  very  similar  to  many  from  Mohenjo-daro.  No.  22  is  wheel-made,  despite  its  small 
size,  and  No.  24  is  coloured  red  inside  and  out;  its  interior  is  also  ornamented  with  thin, 
black  lines. 

Type  UA  (Pis.  XXVI,  60,  62-64,  XXVII,  13-19, 23,  XXVIII,  7,  8, 38, 40, 41,43, 44, 47, 5^, 
57, 68, 69,  XXXIX,  25) 

A number  of  cups  greater  in  height  than  in  diameter  are  included  under  this  type 
letter.  They  are  of  various  shapes  and  sizes. 

Nos.  15,  17  in  PI.  XXYII  and  Nos.  39-41  in  Pi.  XXVIII  are  hand-made.  A red  slip 
covers  the  two  cups  in  Pis.  XXVI,  63  and  XXVIII,  42.  Those  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXVI,  62, 
XXVII,  19.  and  XXVIII,  39.  44,  56,  57,  69  are  all  roughly  ornamented  with  red  lines 
applied  to  the  natural  surface  of  the  pottery.  No.  43  is  an  e.xception,  for  it  is  coated  with  a 
cream  wash. 

No.  38  in  PI.  XXVIII  is  only  2.1  inches  high  and  bears  a rough  decoration  of 
irregular  black  lines  on  a light  red  ground. 

C?  O O 

The  two  small  vessels  in  PI.  XXVI,  60  and  PI.  XXVII,  23  were  originally  taller,  but 
their  broken  tops  had  been  rubbed  down  smooth  and  in  the  case  of  the  first  even  carefully 
bevelled. 

The  cup  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  25  measures  2.8  inches  high.  Its  lower  third  is  cream-coloured 
and  the  upper  Uvo-thirds  red  and  ornamented  with  three  black  lines.  A minute  jar  was 
found  fixed  in  this  cup  to  serve  as  a stopper. 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  227. 


This  same  brown  coating  is  found  on  some  of  the  storage  jars. 


8o 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Type  UB  (PlXXyil,34,35) 

These  cups  with  their  straight,  sloping  sides  are  represented  by  one  from  Mohenjo- 
daro,  but  this  had  rather  a wider  base.^®  Neither  of  the  two  vessels  illustrated  has  a slip,  and 
No.  35  is  more  carefully  finished  than  No.  34. 


48,  60,  64, 


07; 


Many  of  these  bowls,  of  various  sizes  and  shapes,  will  have  to  be  sub-divided  later  when 
fresh  material  is  available.  Some  are  of  better  finish  inside  than  out  and  pared  exterior 
surfaces  are  very  common. 

No.  8 in  PL  XXVII  has  a red  spot  in  the  middle  of  its  base  and  red  transverse  lines  in 
groups  ornament  its  rim.  No.  26  has  an  inside  decoration  of  concentric  circles  in  light  red. 
The  curious  bowl  shown  in  PI.  XXVII,  39  is  covered  with  a pink-coloured  slip  inside  and 
out.  Groups  of  looped  lines  in  dark  red  decorate  the  flat  rim  and  wavy  lines  in  the  same 
colour  are  painted  round  the  outside.  No.  41  has  its  flat  rim  decorated  in  much  the  same 
way.  A ladder  pattern  in  red  is  just  distinguishable  on  the  edge  of  No.  44. 

The  large  bowl  No.  46  is  v'ery  smoothly  finished  inside  and  is  undecorated  save  for 
five  cord  lines  round  its  outside.  No.  50  bears  purplish-black  lines  on  a pink  slip,  and  the 
upper  portion  of  No.  5 1 is  pink  and  the  lower  cream-coloured. 

A red  wash  that  has  dripped  in  places  covers  the  rim  and  neck  of  No.  58,  the  rest 
of  this  vessel  being  cream-coloured.  Solar  motifs  and  thick  and  thin  borders  in  black  paint 
on  a light  red  slip  are  a feature  of  the  decoration  of  the  little  bowl  No.  59,  which  is  also 
shown  in  colour  in  Pi.  XXIII,  2.  The  rim  of  No.  61  is  missing;  its  body  is  ornamented  with 
dark  red  lines  on  a light  red  ground. 

A red  slip  is  used  on  Nos.  31,65,  in  Pi.  XXVII  and  also  on  No.  32  in  Pi.  XXVIII. 
A brown  slip  covers  No.  32  in  Pi.  XXVII.  Nos.  25  in  PL  XXVII  and  48  in  PL  XXVIII  are 
both  of  grey  ware,  the  former  having  a black  slip  on  the  inner  and  a dark  grey  one  on 
the  outer  side. 


Nos.  21,  28,  29,  48,  49,  55  in  PL  XXVII  are  all  hand-made. 


Type  W (PI.  XXVII,  36,  37) 

No.  36  has  been  included  here  because,  although  originally  the  top  of  a food-stand,  it 
was  later  used  as  a platter.  Its  ragged  base  had  been  carefully  rubbed  down  flat  to  serve 
as  a foot,  though  a most  inadequate  one.  A light  red  slip  covers  this  dish  inside  and  out. 

No.  37,  a platter  with  a wide  base,  is  roughly  finished  on  the  outside;  inside  it  is  excep- 
tionally smooth  and  coated  wfith  a red  wash. 


Type  X (Pis.  XXUl,  4,  XXVI,  12-55,  XXVlll,  66,  XXIX,  49-53, 57-62,  69-73,  XXXVll,  47, 
XXXIX,  19} 

A considerable  number  of  jar-covers  in  perfect  condition  were  found;  their  substantial 
make  prevented  them  from  being  easily  broken.  The  most  common  form  is  the  simple  lid 


=«  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LVI,  52. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


shown  in  Pis.  XXVI,  36,  37, 40, 43,  XXVIII,  66,  XXIX,  59-61, 70,  71.  These  are  all  hand- 
made and  but  few  are  covered  with  a slip.  No.  66  in  Pi.  XXVIII  differs  from  the  others 
in  having  a red  wash  on  its  upper  surface  and  also  a small  slanting  hole  on  each  side  of  the 
projection  that  serves  as  a handle. 

A peculiarity  of  many  of  these  covers  is  the  presence  of  a shallow  hole  on  the  top  of 
the  knob-handle  (Pi.  XXIX,  58,  59,  61).  A possible  explanation  for  it  is  that  it  once  held  a 
small  twig  for  steadying  the  cover  while  it  w'as  being  fashioned. 

The  notched  edge  of  the  lid  in  Pi.  XXIX,  57  is  also  strange,  but  would  allow  of  a certain 
amount  of  air  to  enter  the  jar  it  covered.  No.  70  in  the  same  plate  has  a converging  hole 
on  each  side  of  the  handle,  possibly  for  the  same  reason. 

Decorated  jar-covers  of  this  period  are  rare,  a fact  that  makes  No.  4 in  Pi.  XXIII  (see 
also  PI.  XXXVII,  47)  of  especial  interest.  This  lid,  w'hich  once  had  a knob,  measures  7.7 
inches  in  diameter  and  is  finely  painted  with  a circle  and  leaf  motif  in  black  on  a highly 
polished  red  slip.  The  jar  to  which  this  cover  originally  belonged  w^as  probably  equally 
beautiful. 

Nos.  64-66  in  Pi.  XXIX  are  made  of  shell  and  will  he  referred  to  again  further  on 
in  this  book. 

The  bowl-like  type  of  lid  with  knob  handle  inside  (Pi.  XXVI,  12-34)  is  much  more 
common  than  at  Mohenjo-daro.  In  most  cases  the  handles  are  below  the  rims,  which  make 
them  difficult  to  grasp.  Beyond  the  very  occasional  use  of  a red  wash  or  slip  this  type  of 
jar-lid  is  never  ornamented.  I have  mentioned  elsewhere  that  jar-covers  of  this  type  occur 
in  Baluchistan,  Sumer,  Palestine,  and  even  the  south  of  Italy.”  Practically  all  these  bowT 
shaped  specimens  have  a better  finish  on  the  inside  than  on  the  outside,  for  the  reason 
that  little  of  the  latter  could  be  seen  when  the  jar  w'as  in  position. 

The  exceptionally  large  lid.  No.  22  in  PI.  XXVI,  comes  from  the  summit  of  Mound  I 
and  W'as  probably  made  to  fit  a storage  jar.  The  top  of  its  handle  bears  a spot  of  red 
paint,  evidently  a distinguishing  mark.  Nos.  32, 41,55  in  Pi.  XXVI  are  painted  red  inside 
and  out,  w'hile  Nos.  49,  51, 53  are  decorated  w'ith  that  colour  on  the  outside  only.  No.  39 
is  hand-made  and  its  upper  surface  is  ornamented  with  concentric  circles  in  red.  The  lids 
in  Pis.  XXVI,  29,  33.  48  and  XXIX,  71  are  made  of  a coarse  grey  paste. 

A ven'  unusual  lid,  or  rather  stopper,  with  a ffanged  top  is  shown  in  Pi.  XXVI,  54. 
A small  hole  pierces  its  shank,  by  which  it  was  once  tied  to  the  vessel  it  fitted.  No.  69  in 
Pi.  XXIX  (see  also  Pi.  XCI,  9)  has  been  treated  in  the  same  w ay.  These  two  objects  may 
have  belonged  to  w'ater-skins. 

No.  57  in  Pi.  XXVI  closely  resembles  two  lids  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  except  that  it 
has  a longer  shank.”  The  stoppers  pictured  in  PI.  XXIX,  49-52  are  of  an  entirely  new'  shape. 
They  are  all  hand-made,  ven,'  regular  in  form,  but  with  rather  rough  surfaces.  Nos.  53,  62, 
73  in  the  same  plate  may  be  either  plumb-bobs  or  jar-stoppers,  probably  the  latter.  Each 
one  is  hand-made,  ruddled,  and  perforated  for  a cord.  The  base  of  No.  71  is  square  in  form, 
measuring  1.2  inches  each  way. 

A small  jar  used  as  a stopper  can  be  seen  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  25. 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  204. 


^«AI.  I.  C.,  pi.  LXXXII,  51,55. 


82 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Type  Y (PI  XXVI,  6i,  67,  67,  a) 

This  type  of  vessel  was  rare  at  Mohenjo-daro;  at  Chanhu-daro  only  three  sherds  were 
found  which  could  be  identified  with  it.  It  is  characterised  by  its  broad,  flat  base  and 
horizontally  fluted  sides.'® 

Type  2 (PI  XXVI,  72) 

It  is  uncertain  whether  the  tall  jar  with  missing  neck  and  rim  in  PI.  XXVI,  72  belongs 
to  this  type  or  should  come  under  the  heading  SB,  where  it  has  been  mentioned. 

Type  AA 

This  type  has  not  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  AC  (Pi.  XXV,  54,  S5>  5^>  59) 

Handled  cups  of  this  type  were  plentiful  at  Mohenjo-daro.  Its  ear-like  handle  is  always 
perforated.  Nos.  54,  58,  59  are  hand-made,  the  last  two  being  without  the  usual  cream  slip. 
No.  9 in  Pi.  XXVII  is  almost  certainly  one  of  these  cups  that  has  lost  its  handle. 

Vessels  like  these  were  probably  used  to  ladle  out  water  from  a large  jar  to  which  they 
may  have  been  tied  to  prevent  loss. 

Type  AD  (Pi.  XXVI,  74-87} 

These  squat,  open-mouthed  jars,  greater  in  diameter  than  in  height,  are  also  plentiful 
at  Mohenjo-daro.  Some  are  quite  presentable  in  appearance,  others  are  very  roughly  made. 
A cream-coloured  slip  is  the  usual  finish.  Nos.  79  and  82,  however,  are  coloured  red,  the 
latter  being  further  ornamented  with  a hatched  border  and  lines  in  black  paint.  No.  83  is  of 
grey  clay  coated  with  a darker  slip  of  the  same  colour. 

Type  AE  (Pi.  XXVI,  4-1 1) 

Jar  stands  in  several  new  varieties  have  come  to  light  at  Chanhu-daro.  No.  6,  which 
comes  from  the  summit  of  Mound  I,  has  a very  unusual  carinated  base.  The  curious  form 
in  PI.  XXVI,  7 also  comes  from  Mound  I and  is  similar  to  one  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro.®® 
No.  10  is  entirely  new  and  appears  to  be  a copy  in  clay  of  a ring  of  rope  or  straw,  the 
simplest  form  of  jar-stand. 

None  of  the  examples  shown  are  ornamented;  painted  or  incised  stands  of  this  period 
are  very  rare.®^  The  reversibility  of  these  stands  should  be  noted,  and  Nos.  8 and  1 1 were 
evidently  made  to  seat  jars  of  various  sizes. 

Type  AF  (Pis.  XXVI,  1-3,  XXVIll,  61-63) 

It  has  not  yet  been  settled  what  purpose  these  perforated  vessels  served,  but  Sir  Aurel 
Stein’s  suggestion  that  they  may  have  been  braziers  at  present  holds  the  field.®®  Some 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  LXXXIII,  1, 2;  F.  E.  AL,  pi.  LIII,  21. 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LIII,  53.  F.  E.  M.,  p.  185.  Mem.  Arch.  Siirv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pp.  64,  130. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


83 


features  of  their  workmanship,  however,  still  need  explanation;  for  example,  the  significance 
of  the  large  hole  punched  in  the  base  of  nearly  every  specimen.®^  These  objects  have 
recently  been  compared  to  the  ritual  vessels  that  are  used  by  devotees  in  Madras  at  the 
present  day  for  burning  camphor.“  The  suggestion  to  my  mind  is  quite  plausible,  but  for 
camphor  we  should  perhaps  substitute  incense. 

This  type  of  vessel  is  always  wheel-made  and  rarely  covered  with  a slip.  The  sides  are 
pierced  irregularly  with  a number  of  small  holes,  made  with  a stick  pushed  through  from 
the  outside.  A larger  hole,  as  already  said,  is  almost  invariably  present  in  the  centre  of 
the  base. 

Plate  XXVI.  No.  i:  4.53  inches  high.  Upper  portion  missing.  Holes  irregularly 
placed  and  averaging  0.3  inch  in  diameter. 

No.  2:  2.1  inches  high.  Holes  0.07  inch  in  diameter.  Six  holes  in  base  of  same  size  as 
those  in  sides. 

No.  3:  2.43  inches  high.  Hole  in  base  0.3  inch  in  diameter.  Other  holes  average  o.i 
inch  in  diameter.  Dark  red  line  painted  round  rim. 

Plate  XXVlll.  No.  61:  1.3  inches  high.  Roughly  made,  perhaps  by  a child.  One 
small  hole  in  centre  of  base  and  others  of  the  same  size  distributed  irregularly  round  the  sides. 

No.  62:  1 .84  inches  high.  Hole  in  centre  of  base  o. i inch  in  diameter.  Holes  in  sides 
averaged  0.06  inch  wide  and  have  their  rough  edges  inside  more  or  less  smoothed. 

No.  63;  1.23  inches  high.  Minute  holes  in  sides  and  base.  Evidently  a model  for  a 
great  part  of  its  interior  is  solid. 

Types  AG,  AH 

These  two  types  are  at  present  unknown  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  Al  (Pi  XXIV,  3) 

Only  one  example  of  this  globular  type  of  vessel  has  been  found  and  this  has  been 
included  among  the  storage  jars  on  account  of  its  large  size.  It  has  no  slip  but  is  otherwise 
well  made. 


Type  a;  (P/.XXI/m,  1 2,  35, 55) 

The  height  of  this  type  of  jar  seldom  exceeds  its  width.  It  is  distinctly  rare,  though 
a variation  of  it  CType  E)  is  much  more  common.  The  second  jar  illustrated  is  without  a 
slip.  The  lower  portions  and  bases  of  all  three  have  been  pared.  Vessels  of  this  type  from 
Mohenjo-daro  are  sometimes  ornamented. 


Group  AK  (Pis.  XXV,  24, 30,  XXVI,  60, 63,  XXVII,  13-19,75,76,82,84-88,  XXVIII,  25, 


43>  56-58,  60-69) 

Excluding  low  vessels,  such  as  dishes  and  the  like,  there  have  been  found  in  the  cities 
of  the  Harappa  Culture  numbers  of  jars  under  two  inches  in  height.  Owing  to  their  varied 


This,  I take  it,  was  to  support  the  vessel  on  a rod.  If  so,  these  jars  may  have  been  used  as 
torches.  The  miniature  ones  could  have  been  used  by  children  in  play. 

“ Aiyappan,  “ Pottery  Braziers  of  Mohenjo-daro,  ’ Man,  1939,  sect.  65. 


84 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


forms  some  of  these  have  been  described  under  other  headings;  they  evidently  served  as 
containers  for  eye-paints,  scented  fats,  and  cosmetics  of  various  kinds.  A'lany  of  them  are 
gaily  ornamented  with  painted  lines,  sometimes  carefully  drawn  but  more  often  ragged 
and  uneven.®'  The  plainer  specimens  are  usually  roughly  made,  but  so  regular  are  some  of 
them  in  size  and  make  that  it  is  suspected  that  they  were  expressly  fashioned  to  hold  a 
fixed  quantity  of  liquid.  No.  84  in  Pi.  XXVII,  of  very  small  capacity,  has  two  holes  in  its 
rim  by  wTich  it  could  be  suspended.  Only  three  examples  hav^e  red  slips  (Pis.  XXVI,  63, 
XXVII,  18,  XXVIII,  65),  the  second  of  these  having  a dark  red  line  round  its  rim  as  well. 
Roughly  painted  lines  in  red,  applied  to  the  natural  surface  of  the  pottery,  ornament 
Nos.  56,  57,  64,  69,  in  Pi.  XXVIII. 

A dark  brown  slip  covers  the  little  vessel  in  Pi.  XXVII,  86.  This  piece  is  evidently  a 
model  of  a storage  jar;  similar  miniature  replicas  of  storage  vessels  have  been  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro.®® 

It  is  doubtful  w'hether  Nos.  13  and  16  in  Pi.  XXVII  should  be  included  in  this  group, 
for  their  tops  had  been  accidently  broken  and  then  rubbed  dowm  smooth. 

Type  AL  (Pis.  XXV,  56,  60,  XXXIX,  20,21) 

Feeding  cups  of  this  kind  are  common  also  at  Mohenjo-daro.  No.  56  in  Pi.  XXV  is 
coated  wdth  a dark  browm  wash  superimposed  on  a red  one,  a process  wTich  made  it  milk- 
tight  and  also  helped  to  keep  it  clean.  Its  spout  is  missing,  the  hole  at  the  fracture  here  is 
o.i  inch  in  diameter.  No.  60  is  also  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  20.  It  is  somewEat  roughly 
made  and  the  narrow  hole  through  its  spout  (0.09  inch)  is  just  big  enough  to  allow  thick 
milk  to  flow  through.  The  spout  of  No.  21  in  PI.  XXXIX  is  missing.  This  last  little  cup 
measures  3 inches  in  length  and  is  exceptionally  well  made,  wnth  thin  w-alls  and  a polished 
red  slip  inside  and  out. 

Type  AM  (Pis.  XXIT,  56,  XXXIX,  17) 

Partitioned  trays  of  this  kind  are  uncommon.  Five  examples  have  appeared  at  Mohenjo- 
daro  but  one  only  at  Chanhu-daro.  The  specimen  we  illustrate  is  hand-made  and  has  two 
compartments.  It  is  without  a slip,  but  its  interior  has  been  so  carefully  smoothed  over  with 
the  fingers  that  an  almost  polished  surface  has  thereby  been  produced.  The  flat  base  of  this 
article,  wEich  most  likely  w’as  used  for  condiments,  shows  that  it  was  either  shaped  or  laid  to 
dry  upon  a bed  of  sand. 

Types  AN,  AO,  AP 

These  three  types  are  not  represented  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  AQ  (PI.  XXVUl,  49,  XXXIX,  23) 

This  beautifully  made  and  finished  jar,  wEich  is  shown  in  photograph  in  PI.  XXXIX, 
23  and  again  in  colour  in  Pi.  XXIII,  6,  is  of  a rare  type.  An  unpainted  vessel,  originally  of 

This  decoration  appears  in  some  cases  to  have  been  done  when  the  vessel  was  on  the  wheel. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  209. 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVI,  12,  15,  21, 27,  34. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


85 


the  same  form,  is  known  from  Mokenjo-daro.®®  The  various  motifs  which  appear  on  the 
present  specimen  are  in  black  on  a highly  polished  light  red  slip.  In  the  upper  register  of 
this  jar  the  motifs  differ  on  opposite  sides,  as  can  be  seen  by  comparing  the  drawing  with 
the  photograph. 

Type  AR 

Not  yet  known  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  AS  (Pis.  XXIV,  i-p,  XXIX,  37,43,  xxxy,  1-4) 

A considerable  number  of  storage  jars  was  unearthed.  These  ranged  in  height  from 
16  inches  to  over  3 feet.*”*  Some  of  them  were  found  serving  as  cess  pits,  others  supported 
drains. 

Nos.  I and  3 in  Pi.  XXIV  are  shapes  that  are  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro.^“  No.  2 is 
a large  pan  which  is  shown  in  situ  in  Pi.  XVI(a).  Its  base  inside  bore  an  incised  pattern 
that  was  much  like  that  on  a fragment  of  a pan  seen  in  PI.  XXXVIII,  9.  The  deep  groove 
round  the  neck  of  No.  4,  which  is  again  illustrated  in  PI.  XVII(g),  was  perhaps  provided  to 
hold  a cord  to  tie  down  a lid  or  cloth  cover.  This  jar  contained  a skull,  a large  shell,  and 
some  metal  objects  (Pi.  LXIX,  1 1-15),  and  its  discovery  is  described  in  p.  25.'^ 

The  cordoned  jar.  No.  5,  is  a new  variety  and  had  been  pressed  into  service  to  support 
the  brick  drain  shown  in  XVH(a).  Its  well  finished  surface  is  coated  with  a cream-coloured 
slip,  and  the  ribs  are  formed  of  thin  strips  of  clay,  which  were  carefully  placed  in  position 
and  then  smoothed  over  with  the  fingers  to  effect  a close  adhesion  to  the  jar.  Whether  this 
method  of  strengthening  a jar  was  an  independent  invention  or  borrowed  from  contemporary 
Sumer,  where  it  was  common,  is  not  yet  known. No  ribbed  jar  of  this  type  is  known 
from  Mohenjo-daro. 

No.  6 in  PI.  XXIV  (see  also  Pi.  XXXV,  3),  is  much  like  No.  4,  except  that  the  lower 
part  of  its  body  has  a pronounced  inward  curve  designed  to  make  it  rest  more  securely  on 
its  stand.  No.  7,  with  its  high  neck  and  flat  base,  upon  which  it  stands  well,  is  a most 
unusual  jar. 

A photograph  of  a very  graceful  jar  common  at  Mohenjo-daro,  may  be  seen  in 
Pi.  XXXV,  2.  This  vessel  is  coated  outside  with  a brown  and  inside  with  a red  slip,  a very 
rare  procedure.  No.  9 in  Pi.  XXIV,  of  a common  form,  was  discovered  lying  close  to,  and 
level  with,  the  large  pan  (No.  2)  described  above. 

A noticeable  feature  of  some  of  these  storage  jars  is  the  concave  base,  formed,  it  may  be, 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXIV,  42.  Its  original  hollow  foot  is  missing,  and  all  traces  of  it  have  been  removed 
by  grinding. 

Two  large  jars  from  an  earlier  excavation  are  pictured  in  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind, 
pi.  XX,  26,  28. 

F.  E.  M,  pi.  LVIII,  4,  8. 

” A description  of  the  skull  will  he  found  in  Chapter  XVI. 

Several  ribbed  jars  have  been  found  in  the  Kulli  mound  in  Baluchistan.  These,  it  would  seem, 
are  contemporary  with  the  Chanhu-daro  vessel:  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Snrv.  bid.,  No.  43,  p.  124,  figs.  41, 
42.  At  Nal,  cordoned  jars  were  very  common:  Hargreaves,  Mem.  Arch.  Siirv.  hid.,  No.  35,  pi.  II  (b,  c). 


86 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


by  setting  the  vessels  on  a pivoted  stand  while  tbeir  surfaces  were  being  finished.  The 
final  touches  have  been  given  to  these  jars  so  carefully  that  it  is  difficult  to  decide  exactly 
how  they  were  made.  Several  large  vessels  from  Alohenjo-daro  appear  to  have  been  built 
up  of  coiled  strips  of  clay  and  then  completed  on  a turn-table.”  Certainly  no  paddle  was 
ever  used  on  their  surfaces. 

All  these  jars  are  adequately  baked,  and  the  same  materials  were  used  in  their  manu- 
facture as  for  the  rest  of  the  pottery.  They  are  frequently  decorated,  sometimes  with 
elaborate  designs,  sometimes  only  with  thin  lines  of  black,  as  in  PL  XXXV,  3.  The  finely 
painted  jars  in  Pi.  XXXV,  1,4  are  painted  in  black  on  rather  rough  red  slips.”  Other 
painted  jars  of  this  type  from  Chanhu-daro  appear  in  Mr.  Majumdar’s  Report, and  many 
of  the  sherds  shown  in  Pis.  XXX,  XXXI,  XXXII,  XXXIV,  etc.  are  portions  of  jars  of  the 
storage  type. 

A plain  red  slip  is  used  on  Nos.  2,  6,  and  8 in  Pi.  XXIV  and  a cream-coloured  one  on 
Nos.  4,  5,  and  7.  Nos.  i,  3,  and  9 appear  to  have  had  no  slip  at  all.  As  already  mentioned, 
No.  2 in  Pi.  XXXV  is  coated  with  a brown  wash,  possibly  in  an  attempt  to  render  it 
water-tight. 

Except  for  the  objects  found  in  Pi.  XXIV,  4 and  a bone  implement  (Pi.  XC,  23)  from 
No.  2 in  PI.  XXXV,  these  jars  yielded  little  of  interest.  The  three  pieces  of  pottery  numbered 
30-32  in  PI.  XXVIII  were  found  inside  No.  3 in  PI.  XXIV.  The  cordoned  jar  No.  5 con- 
tained no  less  than  nine  small  vessels,  eight  of  which  are  shown  under  numbers  10-17  in 
PI.  XXVIII;  the  ninth  jar  of  this  group  was  of  the  same  shape  as  No.  12.  Lastly,  the 
grey  bowl  shown  in  Pi.  XXVII,  64  came  from  the  inside  of  No.  9 in  Pi.  XXIV. 

A vers'  unusual  variety  of  storage  vessel  is  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXIX,  37.  It  measures 
1 5.5  inches  in  diameter  and  1 1 inches  high  and  is  coated  with  a cream  slip.  The  projecting 
ledge  around  it  shows  that  it  must  have  been  fitted  with  a lid,  but  this  was  never  found. 
This  pan  is  encircled  by  a double  row  of  ventilation  holes,  each  0.25  inch  in  diameter, 
and  it  may  be  assumed,  therefore,  that  its  original  purpose  was  to  hold  food.  When  it  was 
found,  however,  it  contained  a number  of  copper  and  bronze  implements  and  tools,  some  of 
which  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXVII,  1-12,  LXXIII,  29,  LXXIV,  i,  LXXVI,  19. 

A smaller  pan  in  Pi.  XXIX,  43  has  a ring  base  and  is  ornamented  with  purplish-black 
lines  applied  on  a red-coloured  wash. 

From  its  position  high  up  on  the  summit  of  Mound  I,  the  storage  jar  shown  in  Pi.  XL,  4 
is  thought  to  belong  to  the  Late  Harappa  Period.  In  shape,  especially  in  regard  to  its 
incurv'ed  lower  portion,  it  is  not  unlike  some  of  the  jars  in  Pi.  XXIV,  but  it  differs  from  them 
in  being  covered  with  a thick  sand  deposit  almost  up  to  the  neck.  This  coating  has  been 
grooved  with  the  fingers  to  form  a rough  pattern. 


F.  E.  AL,  p.  212.  Some  of  the  large  Jhukar  jars  appear  to  have  been  made  in  the  same  way,  as 
witness  the  face  of  the  large  sherd  in  PI.  XLVII,  15. 

Nos.  I and  4 in  this  plate  are  21.2  and  21.75  ins.  high  respectively. 

Exflorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  26,  28. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


87 


NEW  TYPES  OF  POTTERY 

Ty^e  AT  (Pis.  XXIX,  5-1 1,  XXXIX,  16) 

A strange-looking  vessel  is  the  tall  conical  cup  of  which  examples  may  be  seen  in 
Pi. XXIX,  5-1 1.  At  Chanhu-daro  this  new  form  largely  takes  the  place  of  the  roughly 
made  cups  (Pi.  XXIX,  28)  which  have  appeared  in  such  quantities  at  Mohenjo-daro.  These 
narrow  vessels  could  have  held  but  a minimum  of  liquid  and  would  have  had  to  be  emptied 
before  they  could  be  set  down  again;  some  of  them  can  hardly  stand  on  their  inadequate 
bases.  Taking  their  instability  into  account  and  also  the  fact  that  Sumerian  priests  are 
represented  as  holding  libation  vessels  of  much  the  same  shape,'**  we  may  infer  that  at 
Chanhu-daro  this  particular  type  of  pottery  sensed  a similar  religious  purpose. 

Most  of  this  pottery  is  of  rough  workmanship  and  heavily  pared.  Sometimes  the 
latter  is  very'  carefully  done  and  the  facets  left  by  the  knife  are  almost  regular,  as  is  seen, 
for  example,  in  the  little  cup  3.4  inches  high  in  PI.  XXXIX,  16.  Very  few  of  these  vessels 
have  a slip,  although  No.  7 in  Pi.  XXIX  has  one  of  cream.  The  type  has  been  found  at  levels 
ranging  from  — 6.6  to  + 1 1 .0  feet. 

Type  AT  A (PI.  XXIX,  12-15, 17-M) 

This  is  a slight  variation  of  the  preceding  type  and  embraces  cups  with  concave  sides, 
a feature  especially  pronounced  in  Nos.  23,  24.  Like  those  of  Type  AT  these  little  vessels 
have  been  heavily  trimmed,  and  in  consequence  their  small  flat  bases  show  slightly  rounded 
edges.  No.  13,  which  is  hand-made,  comes  from  a level  as  low  as  23.8  feet  below  datum 
level.  A pink-coloured  slip  covers  No.  22,  but  the  remainder  are  of  little  interest  apart  from 
their  shape. 

The  pottery  vessels  described  below  cannot  at  present  be  included  under  any  type 
letter,  until  we  know  whether  or  not  their  forms  are  accidental. 

Plate  XXVI.  No.  66,  a cup-like  vessel,  is  thin  for  its  size  and  is  without  a slip.  It  can 
barely  stand  on  its  very  narrow  base.  No.  71,  with  its  thin  flared  mouth  and  narrow  neck, 
has  a very  graceful  shape.  It  is  ornamented  with  broad  bands  of  purplish-black  on  a light 
red  slip.” 

Plate  XXVII.  No.  33  in  this  plate  is  illustrated  again  in  photograph  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  1 8. 
It  is  an  oval,  hand-made  dish  with  its  rim  overhanging  its  interior  and  suggesting  that  it 
had  been  made  to  hold  a liquid.  It  has  no  slip  but  is  otherwise  of  careful  work.  No.  39, 
with  its  markedly  concave  sides,  is  a curious  vessel.  Its  flat,  wide  rim  bears  a decoration  of  a 
series  of  loops  in  dark  red,  and  wa\’y  lines  of  the  same  colour  encircle  its  body,  which  is 
coated  with  a pink  slip.  From  the  style  of  its  decoration  this  bowl  could  belong  to  the 
Jhukar  Period.  It  was  found  at  the  foot  of  Mound  II,  but  may  have  rolled  down  from  a 
higher  level. 

C.  Zervos,  L'Art  Mesopotamie,  pi.  83.  Vessels  of  very  similar  form  in  metal,  stone,  and  clay 
have  been  found  on  many  Sumerian  sites:  Frankfort,  Oriental  Institute  Communications,  Chicago. 
No.  20,  p.  7 (6);  Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  pis.  235  (42,  43),  251  (yc,  16). 

It  is  possible  that  this  jar  may  be  of  Jhukar  work. 


88 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  53  is  not  unlike  in  shape  the  vessels  of  Type  Y,‘®  hut  lacks  the  deeply  grooved 
sides  of  that  type  and,  moreover,  has  a ring  hase.  It  is  extremely  well  made  and  is  orna- 
mented with  four  pairs  of  purplish-hlack  lines  on  a light  red  slip. 

The  decoration  of  No.  68  consists  of  a number  of  thick  and  thin  lines  in  purplish-black 
on  a smooth  red  coating.  Its  tall  neck,  which  may  once  have  possessed  a flared  lip,  is  coloured 
a warm  black  and  its  high  foot  is  thickly  covered  with  a pink-coloured  slip.'^ 

Plate  XXVlll.  The  deep,  overhanging  rim  of  No.  2 distinguishes  it  from  the  vessels 
of  Type  AJ.  Heavy  for  its  size  and  without  a slip  the  lower  portion  of  this  jar  is  ragged 
and  badly  trimmed.  A thin  spiral  line  decorates  the  body  of  No.  14,  which  somewhat 
resembles  Type  SA,  but  nothing  quite  like  this  specimen  has  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

No.  1 8 is  a very  large  version  of  Type  C.  It  has  a red-coloured  slip  and  its  lower  portion 
shows  considerable  trimming.  The  deep  groove  round  the  middle  of  No.  29  is  a most 
unusual  feature.  This  jar  is  without  a slip  and  its  sides  below  the  groove  have  been 
heavily  scraped.  No.  34  is  a well-made  flask  which  bears  very  pronounced  string  grooving 
on  its  flat  base  and  should  have  been  included  with  the  Jhukar  pottery. 

PAINTED  POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  PERIOD 

Polychrome  Ware 

The  fragment  of  a bowl,  illustrated  in  line  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  6 and  in  photograph  in 
Pi.  XXXVI,  23,  is  the  only  specimen  of  polychrome  ware  of  this  period  that  has  appeared 
at  Chanhu-daro.  On  it  is  painted  the  figure  of  a squirrel,  facing  to  the  right  with  paws 
held  to  its  mouth  and  tail  carried  aloft.®"  The  body  of  the  animal  is  white  with  the  outlines 
and  markings  in  black.  Behind  it  is  a roundel,  also  in  black  and  white,  followed  by  an 
indefinite  object  that  looks  like  a tree.  Facing  the  squirrel  is  a bird  with  head  turned 
backwards  and  coloured  a dark  red  outlined  with  black.  All  these  motifs  are  set  on  a light 
yellow  ground.  The  lower  register  shows  a row  of  bright  red  spots  encircled  with  black  on 
a white  base.  This  multi-coloured  bowl  was  evidently  a valued  possession,  for  attempts 
had  been  made  to  repair  it.  One  of  the  rivet-holes  used,  o.i  inch  in  diameter,  may  be 
seen  on  the  right  hand  edge  of  the  sherd  in  PI.  XXXVI,  23.  In  its  original  condition  this 
bowl  must  have  been  of  exceptional  excellence  for  it  is  carefully  painted,  the  squirrel,  in 
particular,  being  a vety'  realistic  piece  of  work.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  painter  has 
avoided  using  bright  tones  for  an  animal  whose  natural  colouring  in  India  is  grey  and 
black.  It  is  indeed  possible  that  grey  was  the  colour  used  for  the  squirrel  in  the  first  place, 
and  that  this,  in  the  course  of  time,  has  faded  to  white.  The  bird  next  to  the  squirrel  is 
perhaps  intended  for  a peacock,  a favourite  subject  for  the  decoration  of  the  monochrome 
pottery,  as  we  shall  presently  see. 

^«F.E.M.,  pl.LIII,2i. 

Compare  the  shape  of  this  vessel  with  one  of  Jhukar  date  in  pi.  XLI,  38. 

This  is  the  first  appearance  of  this  animal  on  painted  potter)',  though  models  of  it  in  faience  have 
appeared  at  Mohenjo-daro:  AI.  I.  C.,  pi.  XCVI,  7;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXVII,  20. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


89 


Monochrome  Wares 

Monochrome  painting  is  nearly  always  carried  out  in  black,  or  purplish-black,  on  a 
red  slip,  and  in  this  respect  it  does  not  differ  from  the  monochrome  wares  of  Elarappa  and 
Alohenjo-daro.  Occasionally,  a cream-coloured  slip  is  used  in  place  of  the  red  one,  or,  rarer 
still,  the  natural  surface  of  the  pottery  is  employed  as  a ground.  The  black  or  purplish- 
coloured  paint  is  a manganiferous  haematite,  ground  down  in  water,  which  when  applied  to 
a non-porous  slip,  such  as  a red  one,  remains  slightly  in  relief  and  has  a matt  appearance. 
When  painted  on  a cream  slip  or  on  a jar  with  no  slip  at  all,  it  is  more  rapidly  absorbed 
and  consequently  looks  thinner  and  inclines  to  dark  purple  in  hue. 

Designs 

No  human  figures  occur  on  any  of  the  painted  wares  of  the  Harappa  Period.®^  Animals 
and  birds,  especially  the  latter,  are,  however,  quite  common,  but  geometrical  and  floral 
designs  are  the  most  frequent  and  were  evidently  held  in  high  regard.  The  large  storage 
jars  are  very  often  extensively  decorated,  practically  the  whole  of  a jar  being  covered  with  a 
maze  of  design,  except  for  the  base  which  normally  would  be  hidden  by  a stand  or  by  the 
earth  in  which  it  was  sometimes  set.  Floral  sprays  with  birds  among  the  branches  (PI. 
XXXVI,  7,  9),  peacocks  amid  trees  and  undergrowth  (PL  XXXX’I,  14,  16),  goats  nibbling  at 
trees  (Pl.XXXX'I,  25),  all  find  a place  in  the  delightful  scenes  painted  on  the  larger  jars. 
Conventionalized  plant  forms  are  popular,  the  pipal  tree  being  the  favourite  subject  (PI. 
XXXVI,  37),  but  formal  geometric  patterns  are  somewhat  infrequent,  if  an  exception  is 
made  in  the  case  of  the  intersecting  circle  design  (Pis.  XXIII,  4,  5,  XXXV’II,  40-42,  47,  48). 
So  few  painted  vessels  are  without  some  traces  of  this  pattern  that  it  might  well  be  called 
the  hall-mark  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Simple  bands  and  borders  suffice  to  decorate  the  smaller  pieces  of  potter)’,  so  that 
much  of  the  surface  is  left  bare,  but  great  trouble  was  taken  to  avoid  blank  spaces  on  the 
larger  wares.  This  horror  racni  often  led  a jar-painter  to  over-elaborate  his  work  (Pis. 
XXXIII,  8 XXXV,  4,  XXXVI,  14, 19),  rather  than  to  rely  on  simple  forms  and  back-grounds. 
On  the  other  hand,  this  confusion  does  give  an  idea  of  the  way  the  colouring  and  markings 
of  animals  in  the  Indian  jungle  melt,  by  a natural  process  of  camouflage,  into  the  sur- 
rounding foliage. 

In  describing  this  painted  potter)'  it  will  be  convenient  to  group  together  the  various 
forms  and  patterns  that  decorate  it.  The  animals  will,  therefore,  be  dealt  with  first. 

Ihex.  Though  this  beast  is  frequently  depicted  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  pottery,  it  occurs 
but  once  on  a sherd  from  Chanhu-daro,  where  it  is  shown  in  an  alert  position  against  a 
background  of  trees  or  bushes  (Pi.  XXXVI,  24).  The  body  of  the  animal  is  filled  in  with 
cross  hatching  and  it  appears  to  stand  in  an  enclosure,  if  we  may  so  regard  the  curved  line 
that  shuts  this  scene  in.  Despite  the  stick-like  legs  and  the  unnatural  curves  of  the  body  this 
ibex  still  retains  a certain  amount  of  realism,  in  striking  contrast  to  the  inanimate  objects  that 

I exclude  a certain  type  of  pottery  found  at  Harappa  which  is  definitely  of  a later  date  than 
that  now  under  sun'ey. 


90 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


fill  in  the  rest  of  this  border.®^  Possibly  this  wild  goat  was  not  very  familiar  to  the  jar-painters 
of  Cbanhu-daro,  for  the  city  lies  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Indus  and  well  away  from  the 
rocky  heights  of  Baluchistan  where  this  animal  still  abounds. 

Antelo-pe.  Two  antelopes,  painted  in  black  on  a thick  red  slip,  appear  on  the  sherd 
in  PL  XXXIII,  I . The  beasts  are  very  crudely  drawn,  and  the  long  straight  horns  of  one 
of  them  terminate  in  tufts,  which  add  to  its  bizarre  appearance.  Each  animal  has  a long 
tail  ending  with  a plume  and  arranged  to  fill  in  an  empty  space.  The  bodies  are  carefully 
hatched,  and  to  avoid  monotony,  one  beast  looks  to  the  front  and  the  other  has  its  head 
turned  round. 

The  hind-quarters  of  what  may  be  another  antelope  may  be  seen  on  the  right  hand 
side  of  the  large  sherd  in  Pi.  XXXII,  7. 

Goat.  This  animal  was  domesticated  in  very  early  times  in  India.  It  is  clearly  depicted 
on  the  two  sherds  shown  in  Pis.  XXXIII,  5,  XXXVI,  25,  but  for  want  of  space  the  beast  on 
the  first  sherd  has  no  forelegs,  though  the  horns  and  beard  are  plainly  indicated.  The  shape 
of  the  former  rather  suggests  the  markhor,  a species  which  wanders  in  large  herds  in 
Baluchistan  and  has  been  repeatedly  bred  in  confinement  with  the  domestic  goat.®® 

The  head  of  the  animal  in  PL  XXXVI,  25  has  a bird-like  appearance,  perhaps  because 
the  jar-painter  intended  to  draw  a peacock,  but  then  changed  his  mind  and  added  the  body 
and  limbs  of  a goat.  The  awkward  position  of  the  legs  seems  to  confirm  this  impression.®* 

Animals  arranged  en  file  seldom  appear  on  the  wares  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  but  the 
sherd  in  PL  XXXVII,  27  provides  an  interesting  example  of  this  disposition  which  again 
appears  on  a second  fragment  from  Chanhu-daro.®®  The  style  of  decoration  on  these  two 
sherds  precludes  them  from  being  of  Indian  work  and  we  must  look  somewhere  to  the 
west  for  the  source  of  their  manufacture.®®  This  en  file  arrangement  frequently  appears 
on  Elamite  pottery,  although  in  some  cases  the  figures  have  become  so  degraded  that  they 
are  hardly  recognizable  as  animals.®’  A geometric  motif  derived  from  the  same  source  is 
commonly  found  on  wares  from  Nal.®®  The  same  distorted  figures  of  animals  are  also 
known  on  two  sherds  from  Mohenjo-daro;  ®®  the  painter  of  them  possibly  had  no  idea 
of  their  original  meaning. 

Squirrel.  This  animal  only  appears  on  the  polychrome  sherd  in  PL  XXXVI,  23, 
already  described. 

This  is  a fragment  of  a medium-sized  jar  painted  in  black  on  a light  brown  and  rather  thin  slip. 

Capra  Falconeri,  Hugel. 

Cf.  the  head  of  this  animal  with  those  of  the  birds  in  PL  XXXVI,  16. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  9.  The  animals  here  are  described  as  stags,  which 
they  mav  well  be. 

These  rows  of  animals,  each  resembling  the  other,  occur  quite  frequently  on  the  wares  of 
Baluchistan:  Stein,  Aleni.  Arch.  Sun’,  hid..  No.  43,  pis.  XXII  (Kul.  IV.  I),  XXVIII  (Mehi.  I.  I.  7), 
XXIX  (Mehi.  III.  4.  2),  XXXII  (Alaur.  I.  2). 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  XIII,  pis.  XVIIl,  3.  5,  XLII,  2. 

Hargreaves,  Mem.  Arch.  Siirv.  hid..  No.  35,  pis.  XVlI,  57,  XVIII,  12. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  XC,  21;  F.  E.  ill.,  pi.  LXVIII,  7. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


91 


Hare.  A hare  is  undoubtedly  depicted  in  PI.  XXXVI,  1 9,  though  its  ears  are  so  merged 
with  the  background  that  it  was  at  first  difficult  to  identify.  This  is  the  first  known  appear- 
ance of  this  animal  on  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  although  it  is  well  known  on 
certain  copper  tablets  which  come  from  Mohenjo-daro.'"’  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  any 
particular  religious  significance  was  attached  to  the  hare  in  ancient  India;  many  of  the 
inhabitants  of  that  country  see  a hare  amongst  the  markings  on  the  moon.”'  It  was 
worshipped  as  a deity  in  Egypt  and  appears  in  the  art  of  that  country  as  early  as  predynastic 
times.  It  was  also  used  as  a motif  on  seals  up  to  the  time  of  the  Sixth  Dynasty  and  occurs 
among  Egyptian  hieroglyphs  as  well  as  in  the  Hittite  script. 

Serpents.  Representations  of  serpents  on  the  potter)'  of  this  period  at  Chanhu-daro  are 
always  associated  with  the  cone-like  objects  depicted  on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXX,  5,  XXXVI, 
14,32,  XXXVII,  30,  35,  36,  the  last  specimen  being  a particularly  good  example.””  It  is 
impossible  to  determine  the  species  of  snakes  as  badly  drawn  as  these,  hut  they  are 
certainly  not  cobras,  which  reptiles  sometimes  appear  on  amulets  from  Mohenjo-daro. 

Fishes.  Two  pieces  of  pottery  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXVI,  17,21  show  fishes  nibbling 
at  water-weeds.  Both  scenes  are  too  roughly  drawn,  however,  to  show  their  species;  in  all 
probability  they  are  river  rather  than  sea  fish.  It  has  been  suggested  that  these  fishes  are 
to  be  considered  hooked,  but,  if  so,  the  lines  would  surely  he  taut  instead  of  wavy.  In 
PI.  XXXIII,  4 four  fishes  are  arranged  round  the  narrow  mouth  of  a kohl-pot,  a very  uncom- 
mon decoration  for  a jar  of  this  type.  The  strange  animal  in  PI.  XXXVI,  20  may  be  a 
mud-fish  from  the  shape  of  its  head,  and  the  short  chevron-like  markings  that  surround 
it  may  here  be  an  attempt  to  represent  water.”^ 

Although  there  are  many  fish  signs  in  the  script,  fishes  seldom  appear  on  the  painted 
wares  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  At  Mohenjo-daro  one  fish  appears  on  a polychrome  sherd,®^ 
but  on  no  other  piece  of  potter)'.  Elsewhere,  it  is  quite  a common  motif,  occurring  on  the 
wares  of  Nal  and  Mehi-damb  in  Baluchistan,”®  the  early  pottery  of  Elam,”^  and  the  early 
painted  wares  of  Samarra.”® 

Birds.  Birds  of  many  kinds  are  depicted  on  the  Chanhu-daro  pottery  (Pis.  XXXII,  2-9, 
XXXIII,  2,  3, 7, 12,  XXXV,  I,  XXXVI,  1, 2, 4,  5, 8-16, 18, 22,  23).  The  peacock,  a sacred 
bird  in  many  parts  of  India  to-day,  was  the  favourite  subject  and  is  easily  recognisable  by 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXVII,  5,  6.  A faience  model  of  this  animal  is  also  shown  in  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXIV, 
20.  At  Harappa  it  appears  on  a small  paste  seal:  Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Snrv.  hid.,  1927-28,  pp.  84,  85. 

Crooke,  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  II,  p.  50. 

Petrie,  Buttons  and  Scarabs,  p.  2. 

““Serpents  associated  with  the  same  objects  occur  on  a sherd  from  Mohenjo-daro;  M.I.C., 
pi.  XCII.  23. 

“‘Cf.  with  the  fish  shown  in  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pi.  XXIX  (Mehl.  Ill,  I,  5). 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  219,  pi.  LXX,  10. 

Hargreaves,  Mern.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  35,  pi.  62;  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  43, 
pis.  XXL  XXIX. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  XIII  (117,  174,  175);  t.  XX  (19,  20). 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V,  figs.  5-7,  etc. 


92 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


its  crest  and  spreading  tail  (Pis.  XXXII,  3, 4,  XXXIII,  2,  12,  XXXV,  i,  XXXVI,  4, 12, 16, 
22).  Birds  identical  in  shape  with  these  are  sometimes  shown  without  a crest,  the  omission 
being  perhaps  due  to  hurried  work  (Pi.  XXXII,  2, 4,  8,  9). 

The  peculiar  e.xaggeration  of  the  crests  of  the  birds  in  Pis.  XXXII,  3,  XXXIII,  2,  12, 
XXXV,  I shows  an  exuberant  imagination.  A plant-form  actually  takes  the  place  of  the 
crest  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  2,  while  the  two  are  combined  in  PI.  XXXIII,  12.°“  This  close  associa- 
tion of  a plant-form  with  this  bird  is  of  special  interest,  for  peacocks  are  definitely  connected, 
in  some  parts  of  India,  with  earth  worship  or  with  an  earth  goddess;  they  figure,  for 
instance,  in  the  great  earth  festival  held  by  the  Khonds  of  Southern  India.”"  The  solar 
emblems  surmounting  the  tall  crest  of  the  peacock  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  12  are  also  of  particular 
importance.  Here  there  certainly  seems  to  be  an  association  with  the  sun  as  well  as  with 
the  earth,  the  latter  being  represented  by  the  two  leaves  on  either  side.^"^ 

The  little  scene  in  PI.  XXXII,  3 possibly  depicts  the  same  bird  standing  over  a nest. 
The  head  of  a young  one  appears  just  above  the  edge  of  it  and  the  parent  bird  either  is 
arranging  the  home  or  has  brought  food  to  the  fledgling.  The  parent  bird,  it  will  be  noted, 
has  a crest  similar  to  that  of  the  peacock  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  2. 

The  peacock  does  not  figure  elsewhere  on  ancient  pottery,  probably  because  it  is  a 
native  of  India;  in  very  early  days  it  was  possibly  unknown  to  other  countries.”^ 

The  bird  in  PI.  XXXII,  6 (see  also  PI.  XXXVI,  i)  is  possibly  confined  in  a cage  or 
trap,”^  but  so  much  is  missing  from  this  scene  that  its  interpretation  is  difficult.  A model 
pottery  cage  and  bird  from  Mohenjo-daro  proves  that  birds  were  kept  in  cages  by  the 
people  of  that  city.”® 

It  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  species  the  two  birds  in  Pi.  XXXII,  7 belong.  Their  strong 
legs  and  outstretched  wings  suggest  that  like  the  ostrich  they  represent  a kind  more 
accustomed  to  running  than  to  flying.  A water-hen  was  perhaps  in  the  mind  of  the  painter 
of  Pi.  XXXIII,  3.  Although  the  curious  attitude  is  rather  that  of  a bittern,  the  tail  is 
against  any  such  identification  unless  this  part  is  a separate  motif  that  became  mixed  up  with 
the  bird.  No.  7 in  the  same  plate  may  be  the  common  coot,”®  large  flocks  of  which  are 
found  in  Sindh,  especially  near  the  lakes. 

Insects.  The  figure  in  PI.  XXXVI,  26  is  obviously  an  insect;  the  curved  leg  or  filament 
on  each  side  of  the  body  strongly  suggests  a water  boatman.  The  objects  surrounding  it  also 
look  to  me  to  be  water-plants. 

Compare  pi.  XXXIII,  2 with  another  sherd  from  Chanhu-daro : Majumdar,  Explorations  in 
Sind,  pi.  XX,  6. 

Hopkins,  Religions  of  India,  pp.  528,  536. 

This  will  be  readily  understood  by  those  who  have  seen  a peacock  in  erect  plumage  in  the 
glaring  sun. 

Though  still  found  in  Sindh,  the  bird  is  thought  by  some  to  have  been  introduced  there  by 
human  agency. 

This  will  have  to  be  amended  if  the  bird  painted  on  a bowl  from  one  of  the  Khurab  burials  in 
S.  E.  Persia  be  accepted  as  a peacock;  Stein,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances,  pi.  XXXIV,  5. 

It  is  not  unlike  a bul-bul  in  appearance. 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXXI,  6. 

Fidica  Atra,  Linn. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


93 


Trees  and  Plants.  A painted  jar  or  sherd  without  some  floral  or  plant  design  upon  it 
is  a rarity.  The  most  common  plant  motif  is  the  pipal  tree,  either  represented  in  a natural 
manner,  as  in  Pi. XXXVI, 9,  or  conventionalized,  as  in  Pi. XXXII,  i,a.  Sometimes,  as  will 


be  seen  in  PI.  XXXIV,  5,  the  leaves  of  this  plant  are  barely  distinguishable  from  those  of 
other  plants,  but  when  arranged  in  a stylized  wav,  as  in  Pis.  XXXI,  2,  3,  XXXVI,  37,  this 
pipal  design  forms  a very  striking  decoration.  Elere  the  jar-painter  has  made  the  most  of  his 
skill  and  carefully  avoided  all  extraneous  details.  It  will  be  noticed  that  in  Pi.  XXXVI,  37 
and  again  in  Pi.  XXXV,  4 he  has  been  careful  not  to  commit  the  common  fault  of  allowing 
the  hatching  to  overlap  the  outlines  of  the  leaves,  and  one  gets  the  feeling  that  he  (or  she) 
thoroughly  enjoyed  painting  these  two  storage  vessels  and  that  more  time  than  usual  was 
spent  upon  them. 

b lany  of  the  plants  appearing  on  the  potter^'  are  represented  as  growing  in  the  ground. 
Examples  of  these  may  be  seen  in  Pis.  XXXI,  2,  3,  XXXII,  i , a,  XXX\'I,  29,  37,  where  a little 
mound  of  earth  is  shown  at  the  bases  of  some  of  them.^"’  In  India  it  is  still  a praiseworthy 
act  to  plant  and  nourish  one  of  the  sacred  trees,  and  it  may  be  that  some  of  the  painters  of 
this  pottery  derived  their  inspirations  from  actual  sacred  trees  growing  in  their  own 
compounds. 

A very  common  motif  is  the  chain  of  leaf-like  objects  to  be  seen  on  the  sherds  in 


Pis.  XXX,  7,  XXXI,  16, 20,  XXXII,  I,  I,  a,  XXXIII,  12,  XXXVI,  16, 21, 26,  XXXVII,  20, 26, 


29,  some  of  which  have  filaments  projecting  from  them  on  one  side.  Rows  of  these  linked 
together  appear  conspicuously  on  the  large  storage  jar  in  Pi.  XXXV,  i and  on  the  sherd 
in  PI.  XXXVII,  24.  As  the  motif  is  associated  with  water-animals  in  Pi.  XXXVI,  21, 26,  it 


may  be  derived  from  some  kind  of  water-weed.  Sometimes  each  element  in  the  chain  has  a 
dot  in  the  centre,  making  it  not  unlike  that  of  a bird’s  head  (Pi.  XXXII,  i,  i,  a).  Occasion- 
ally the  elements  are  separate  and  scattered  about  the  field  as  in  Pi.  XXXII,  4.^°®  This  motif, 
whether  connected  or  detached,  is  rarely  seen  on  the  pottery  from  Mohenjo-daro. 

Neither  the  broad-leafed  tree  or  bush  in  Pis.  XXXIII,  8 and  XXXV,  i , 4,  nor  the  plant 
shown  in  PI.  XXXIV,  i can  at  present  be  identified.  The  shrub  or  tree  with  fringed  leaves 
in  Pis.  XXXIV,  9 and  XXXVII,  17,  22,  which  also  appears  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  pottery 
may  be  a representation  of  the  nim  tree.^‘“  This  tree  is  regarded  as  sacred  by  the  Hindus, 
its  leaves  being  held  to  possess,  among  other  magical  qualities,  the  power  to  prevent  disease. 
The  carefully  drawn  branches  and  leaves  on  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XXXIV,  9 look  rather  like 
mimosa,  but  they  may  represent  the  khair  tree,^“  whose  sprigs  are  used  in  India  to  protect 
the  wearer  against  the  Evil  Eye. 


The  same  little  heap  of  soil  is  also  associated  with  a tree  cut  on  a seal  from  Chanhu-daro: 
Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XVII,  34. 

Cf.  with  the  bird’s  heads  on  pottery  from  Luristan:  Contenau  et  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  dii 
Tepe-Giyan,  pi.  67.  On  the  other  hand  is  this  particular  motif  a variation  of  the  guilloche  pattern 
that  so  often  appears  on  Sumerian  and  Cappadocian  seals  and  also  on  the  pottery  of  Persia? 

1°°  F.  E.  AE,  pi.  LXIX,  ii;  LXX,  25. 

Azidiraclita  Indica. 

Acacia  Catechu. 


94 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


In  some  cases  it  would  appear  that  the  jar-painter  had  no  particular  tree  or  hush  in 
mind  and  let  his  hand  wander  freely  over  his  work.  His  chief  concern  seemed  to  have 
been  to  cover  the  surface  of  a jar  as  quickly  as  possible  so  as  to  start  work  on  another 
vessel.  Many  of  the  designs  on  the  pottery  show  evidence  of  this  hurried  labour,  and  com- 
paratively few  pieces  have  had  sufhcient  time  spent  upon  them. 

Festoons.  The  festoon  ornament  on  the  sherd  in  PI.  XXXVII,  24  is  made  up  of  vertical 
chains  of  the  leaf-like  motif  described  above,  linked  together  by  ribbon  loops.  This  pattern 
has  been  carefully  drawn,  but  another  example  from  Chanhu-daro  has  not  been  so  well 
carried  out.”^ 

Intersecting  Circle  Patterns.  Patterns  of  this  kind  were  as  common  at  Chanhu-daro  as 
at  the  other  cities  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  Various  examples  of  them  will  be  seen  in 
Pis.  XXIII,  4,  5,  XXX,  1 1,  16,  17,  22,  XXXIII,  8,  1 1,  XXXVII,  34,  a,  40-42,  47,  48.  Their 
delineation  in  Pi.  XXXVII,  40, 47  (see  also  Pi.  XXIII,  4,  5)  is  particularly  careful.  Rougher 
work  may  be  seen  in  PI.  XXXVII,  42.  On  the  large  storage  jars  in  Pi.  XXXV,  1,4  a circle 
motif  takes  a prominent  place,  and  in  vessels  of  this  kind  about  half  the  painted  area  is 
usually  occupied  by  this  pattern.  No  other  decoration  is  as  a rule  placed  below  it,  but  a 
wide  register  above  it  is  generally  reserved  for  other  forms  of  decoration. 

The  extreme  regularity  of  the  design  in  PI.  XXXVIl,  40  (see  also  Pi.  XXIII,  5) 
suggests  that  it  was  not  drawn  free-hand,  although  no  marks  have  been  left  to  prove  this. 
A sherd  from  Mohenjo-daro  bearing  the  same  pattern  has  faintly  incised  lines,  carefully 
spaced  out,  to  serve  as  a guide  to  the  jar-painter.“^  The  large  jar-cover  illustrated  in 
PI.  XXXVIl,  47  and  in  colour  in  Pi.  XXIII,  4 is  ornamented  with  a circle  design  painted 
in  black  on  a burnished  red  slip,  the  most  carefully  finished  example  of  this  type  of 
decoration  yet  discovered. 

Patterns  of  this  hind  are  not  often  found  outside  India.  At  Arpachiyah  in  Northern 
Iraq  Mr.  Mallowan  unearthed  a bowl  covered  with  a pattern  composed  of  four-petaled 
rosettes,  so  regularly  drawn  that  intersecting  circles  must  have  been  used  as  a guide  for 
them  by  the  painter. The  same  design  has  been  found  on  pottery  of  very  early  date 
from  the  Brak  mound  in  North-w'est  Syria,^^®  while  at  Chagar  Bazar,  also  in  Syria,  a 
sherd  decorated  in  this  same  manner  has  come  to  light,  which,  if  it  had  been  found  in  Sindh 
would  have  been  readily  accepted  as  belonging  to  the  Harappa  Culture.”^  These  examples 
from  Iraq  and  Syria  are,  however,  considerably  earlier  than  any  of  the  wares  of  the  Harappa 
Culture,  and  Mr.  Mallowan  tentatively  suggests  that  “ perhaps  these  early  potters  of  Assyria 
and  Syria  moved  eastwards  and  in  some  region  yet  unexamined  carried  on  that  tradition  for 

Majumdar,  Exhilarations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  24. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  26,  28. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  22;  pi.  LIV,  6. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  60(3). 

Mallowan,  lllust.  Lon.  News,  Oct.  15th,  1938,  p.  699. 

Mallowan,  “ Excavations  at  Tall  Chagar  Bazar,”  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  pi.  II,  2.  Mr.  Mallowan  was 
the  first  to  note  the  resemblance. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


95 


which  we  seem  to  find  comparatively  late  evidence  in  India.”  With  this  statement  I am 
fully  in  accord,  for  as  I shall  point  out  later  some  very  close  resemblances  exist  between  a 
later  (Jhukar)  pottery  found  at  Chanhu-daro  and  the  Tall  Halaf  wares  from  Mr.  Mal- 
lowan’s  excavations. 

A very  interesting  intersecting  circle  pattern  covering  a large  part  of  a pavement  in  the 
palace  of  Ashur-bani-pal,  Nimrod,  provides  a good  example  of  this  type  of  ornament  in 
use  at  a much  later  date.^”  The  Egyptians  never  used  circles  freely  in  decoration  and 
apparently  not  at  all  before  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty.  At  this  time  and  later,  however,  an 
intersecting  circle  pattern  was  in  use  which  resembles  very  closely  the  Indian  examples.^^“ 

Rayed  Solar  Motifs.  These  very  striking  motifs,  which  were  so  popular  with  the 
Chanhu-daro  people,  are  not  represented  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  rarely  occur  on  wares  of 
contemporary  date  from  other  parts  of  Sindh  and  the  Panjab.  They  take  various  forms 
and  positions  on  the  pottery.  Especially  prominent  specimens  will  be  seen  on  the  sherds  in 
Pis. XXXI,  I,  XXXIII,  lo,  13,  14,  XXXVI,  40, 41,  and  its  use  as  a repetition  motif  in  wide 
borders  will  be  observed  in  Pis.  XXXIII,  1 1,  17. 

The  centre  of  the  device  is  either  a plain  circle  with  a spot  in  the  middle  or  an 
annulus  divided  into  four  quarters,  each  of  which  is  filled  in  with  some  form  of  ornamenta- 
tion (Pis.  XXXIII,  10,  XXXVI,  41).  The  rays  issuing  from  the  centre  may  be  either  straight 
with  oblique  ends,  as  in  PI.  XXXI,  i , or  set  at  a tangent,  as  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  10,  14,  15,  17,  etc., 
this  last  being  by  far  the  most  common.  Each  ray  terminates  in  a leaf-like  form,  pipal  leaves 
being  used  in  PI.  XXXIII, 

This  combination  of  plant-form  and  orb  perhaps  symbolizes  the  close  connection 
between  vegetation  and  sunshine,  and  the  tangential  forms  successfully  convey  a belief  that 
the  sun  was  a rotating  body.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
svastika  (an  allied  solar  emblem)  the  direction  of  the  revolution,  whether  clockwise  or 
anti-clockwise,  did  not  trouble  the  artist. 

It  has  been  said  that  this  solar  sign  does  not  occur  on  pottery  from  Mohenjo-daro, 
but  something  akin  to  it  has  been  found  there  carved  on  a seal.  This  is  a six-rayed  object 
with  one  ray  terminating  in  the  head  of  a horned  animal. A sun-symbol  with  seven  rays, 
each  ray  terminating  in  a pipal-leaf  and  closely  resembling  the  emblem  in  Pi.  XXXIII,  16, 
appears  on  one  side  of  a faience  sealing  from  the  excavations  at  Harappa.^"®  Very  elaborate 
and  complex  examples  of  the  same  motif  combined  with  leaves  and  buds  are  used  in  Madras 
and  Bengal  to-day  to  decorate  thresholds  and  floors  on  special  occasions.^'^  They  also  occur 
on  the  ancient  punch-marked  coins  of  India.^“ 

Op.  cit.,  p.  42. 

H.  R.  Hall,  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  Sculftiire  in  the  British  Museum,  p.  49,  pi.  LIV. 

Petrie,  Egyptian  Decorative  Art,  pp.  47,  48,  figs.  87,  88. 

^-1  Cf.  a third  sherd  from  Chanhu-daro  in  Alajumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  12. 

F.  E.  Ah,  pi.  C(g).  Dr.  Legrain  has  already  pointed  out  that  homed  animals  are  frequently 
associated  with  sun  symbols.  On  Lycian  coins  we  find  the  horse  and  birds  occupying  the  same  position : 
Cidture  of  the  Babylonians,  pi.  LV;  see  also  P.  E.  Dumont,  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc.,  vol.  53,  pp.  331-2. 

Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.  1928-29,  pi.  XXXIl  (b,  10,  b). 

H.  G.  Durai,  Man,  1929,  sect.  60.  See  also  Man,  1933,  sect.  168. 

J.  Allen,  Ancient  Indian  Coins  (Cat.  Brit.  Mus.'),  1936. 


96 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Further  afield  a seven-raved  object  with  spatulate  ends  is  painted  on  the  inside  of  a 
bowl  from  Arpachiyah,  dated  to  the  Late  Tell  Halaf  Period/'®  The  same  symbol  also 
occurs  on  an  early  steatite  seal  from  Crete,  but  here  ball-like  appendages  take  the  place 
of  the  leaves  at  the  end  of  the  rays/"” 

No  examples  of  this  radiant  form  of  the  sun-disc  appear  on  Sumerian  or  Elamite 
pottery,  through  it  is  known  on  Sumerian  seals  from  Tell  Asmar  and  Kish^"®  and  again 
on  seals  from  Susa/"®  In  Egypt,  buttons  belonging  to  the  period  covered  by  the  Ninth 
to  the  Twelfth  Dynasties  hear  this  motif,^®“  and  a very  curious  form  of  it,  not  found  else- 
where, may  be  seen  on  a predynastic  bowl/®’^  It  appears  appropriately  enough  on  the  ceilings 
of  some  tombs  at  Thebes/®®  In  Crete  these  radiant  sun  motifs  are  carved  on  Early  and 
Middle  Vlinoan  seals,  besides  being  painted  on  the  pottery.  In  Baluchistan  the  symbol 
frequently  is  found  on  certain  funerar)'  wares  from  Shahi-tump,  but  these  may  be  of  later 
date  than  the  Harappa  wares  from  Chanhu-daro.^®® 

The  fact  that  this  rayed  form  of  the  sun  motif  is  common  to  the  art  of  so  many 
countries  makes  the  land  of  its  origin  a matter  of  conjecture.®®^  Anatolia,  perhaps,  is  the 
most  suitable  choice,  for  the  symbol  has  been  found  there  on  Early  Hittite  pottery  as  well 
as  on  the  later  seals. 

One  of  the  most  common  motifs  occurring  on  the  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture 
is  the  roundel  with  deckled  or  serrated  edges  seen  on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXX,  i , i o,  XXXI,  9, 
XXXII,  I , I , a,  7,  etc.  This  very  simple  form  of  the  sun-motif  was  copied  in  faience  and  was 
frequently  worn  at  Mohenjo-daro  as  a dress  ornament.®®®  Its  place  on  pottery  is  to  fill  in 
empty  spaces  (Pis.  XXXI,  2,  XXXII,  i,  i,a, etc.)  or  to  serve  as  a border  pattern  (Pis.  XXIII, 
2,  XXXI,  9,  XXXII,  7,  XXXIII,  8,  1 1,  XXXY,  4,  etc.),  while  its  appearance  in  the  fish  scene 
in  Pi.  XXXVI,  1 7 may  possibly  be  an  attempt  to  depict  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  the  water. 

Though  so  common  on  the  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  this  motif  is  not  included 
among  the  signs  on  the  seals.  The  position  is  reversed  in  Crete,®®®  for  though  it  does  not 
appear  on  the  pottery  of  that  island  it  occurs  as  a sign  in  the  Minoan  script.®®®  The  same 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  53. 

Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  II,  p.  218,  fig.  123(a).  The  same  form  is  to  be  found  on  M.  M.  I. 
vases,  for  which  see  Bosanquet  and  Dawkins,  “ Palaikastro  Excavations,”  Joiirn.  Brit.  Sch.  Athens, 
Suppl.  Pap.  No.  I,  1902-06,  pi.  X. 

Frankfort,  Orient.  Inst.  Coiimi.,  No.  19,  fig.  29.  The  seal  in  question  is  more  clearly  reproduced 
in  Woolley,  The  Development  of  Sumerian  Art,  fig.  21(c);  Mackay,  Anthrop.  Mem.,  Field  Mus., 
Chicago,  vol.  I,  pi.  XLII,  5,  7. 

Childe,  New  Light  on  the  Most  Ancient  East,  p.  243,  fig.  93. 

130  pgtrie,  Buttons  and  Design  Scarabs,  pi.  Vll,  i,  2. 

Joiirn.  Eg.  Arch.,  vol.  XIV,  p.  262. 

Petrie,  Decorative  Patterns  of  the  Ancient  World,  pi.  LI. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Sitrv.  hid..  No.  43,  pis.  XV,  XVI. 

It  is  also  represented  in  the  early  art  of  Cappadocia,  Greece,  Cyclades,  Danube  basin,  Sweden, 
America,  and  China. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXLV,  14,  15,  19;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXI,  23,  24. 

Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  I,  p.  282. 

Its  association  with  a sign  which  also  does  not  appear  on  the  seals  should  be  noted  in  pi. 
XXXIV,  4. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


97 


symbol  is  frequently  depicted  on  the  painted  wares  of  Northern  and  Southern  Persia;  at 
Tepe-Giyan  it  was  especially  popular/^®  A possible  variation  of  the  symbol  with  dots 
around  the  circumference  in  place  of  the  usual  serrations  occur  on  several  bowls  from 
Arpachiyahd®® 


Svastika.  This  four-limbed  symbol  of  the  sun  finds  no  place  on  the  pottery  of  the 
Harappa  Culture  though  it  frequently  appears  on  beads  and  amulets.  Possibly  the  jar- 
painters  refrained  from  placing  such  a lucky  sign  on  objects  that  were  liable  to  breakage. 
It  is  of  interest  to  note  in  this  connection  that  the  svastika  is  only  portrayed  on  special  burial 
pottery  in  Baluchistan,  which  normally  would  stand  in  little  danger  of  being  broken. 


Scale  Patterns.  Scale  patterns  of  a simple  type  were  especially  popular  with  the  people 
of  Chanhu-daro,  who  sometimes  used  the  device  to  cover  large  areas  of  their  vessels, 
thereby  creating  a very  monotonous  effect.  Examples  of  the  various  uses  of  this  motif  will 
be  seen  in  Pis. XXX, 4,  XXXI,  12, 14,  15, XXXII,  i,  i,  a,  XXXIII,  i,  XXXIV,  15,  XXXVII, 
25.  As  a rule  scale  patterns  are  roughly  executed,  but  particular  care  was  taken  in  the  case 
of  PI.  XXXI,  12,  which  is  unusual  in  its  regularity  and  unique  in  the  manner  in  which 
the  middles  of  the  loops  are  thickened.  Lines  of  lunar  markings  are  thus  formed,  each 
being  put  on  separately  and  giving  the  finished  work  the  effect  of  continuity. 

An  unsightly  design  appears  in  PI.  XXXI,  14.  This  at  first  sight  seems  to  be  made  up 
of  a number  of  minute  circles,  each  with  a dot  in  the  centre,  but  closer  inspection  will 
show  that  it  really  consists  of  a number  of  loops,  forming  a most  unusual  scale  pattern. 

The  more  elaborate  scale  patterns  that  were  so  favoured  at  Mohenjo-daro  have  no 
counterparts  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Chequer  Patterns.  This  type  of  ornament  is  only  represented  on  three  sherds  from 
Chanhu-daro  (Pis.  XXIII,  i , XXX,  24,  XXXVII,  8);  at  Mohenjo-daro  it  was  much  more 
common.  The  pattern  is  without  doubt  derived  from  basket  work  and  examples  of  it  are 
to  be  seen  on  most  ancient  wares.  It  occurs  as  early  as  the  Tall  Halaf  Period. 


Ladder  Patterns.  Quite  large  areas  were  occupied  with  this  pattern  as  the  sherds  in 
Pis.  XXXI,  18,  19,  22,  XXXVII,  28, 44  will  show.  When  carefully  executed,  as  in  Pi.  XXXI, 
18,22,  the  effect  produced  is  not  unpleasant,  but  when  the  ratlines  are  fine  and  closely 
spaced,  as  in  PI.  X30(VII,  28,  the  result  is  most  unpleasing.  This  type  of  decoration  is  also 
known  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  pottery;  it  is  possibly  derived  from  the  rope  sling  in  which 
some  of  the  larger  jars  were  carried. 

Hemisfherical  Motifs.  The  significance  of  the  linked  hemispherical  objects  portrayed 
on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXXI,  8,  17  and  XXXVI,  10  is  unknown.  They  are  always  arranged 


Contenau  et  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  du  Te-pe-Giyan,  pis.  21,  24,  65,  etc.;  Mem.  Del.  en  Perse; 
t.  VIII,  pp.  1 1 2,  128,  134;  t.  XX,  p.  122. 

Klallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  figs.  65,  67. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid.,  No.  43,  pis.  XV,  XVI,  XVII.  On  some  pieces  of  this  burial 
potter)’  from  Shahi-tump,  the  svastikas  have  five  and  even  six  arms  and  should  perhaps  be  rightly 
termed  rayed  sun-motifs. 


98 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


in  parallel  rows  and  in  one  case  (Pi.  XXXVI,  i o)  appear  to  enclose  the  figure  of  a bird.  They 
may,  therefore,  be  nets  or  traps  of  some  kind,  a supposition  borne  out  by  the  trap-like 
objects  alongside  the  apparently  imprisoned  ibex  in  Pi.  XXXVI,  24.  At  Mohenjo-daro  single 
motifs  of  hemispherical  shape  occupy  the  vacancies  of  a loop  pattern,^^^  but  at  Chanhu-daro 
they  are  never  used  in  this  way. 

Comb  Motif.  Examples  of  this  queer  motif  are  illustrated  in  the  upper  registers  of 
the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXIII,  3,  XXXI,  12,  XXXII,  i,  XXXIV,  1 5,  and  similar  objects  appear  on 
the  pottery  of  Mohenjo-daro.^’*^  Those  who  doubt  the  fact  that  combs  can  be  used  as  motifs 
on  pottery  should  refer  to  particularly  distinct  examples  on  vessels  of  the  Tell  Halaf  Period 
from  Northern  Mesopotamia.^^^  Combs  are  also  painted  on  an  early  bowl  from  Susa.^^* 
Why  such  objects  are  represented  at  all  on  pottery  raises  a question  that  cannot  be  easily 
answered.  That  they  formed  part  of  the  equipment  of  a potter  is  shown  by  the  incised 
patterns  on  the  two  sherds  in  Pi.  XXXVIII,  26,  29,  hut  it  seems  unlikely  that  he  regarded 
this  one  tool  as  important  enough  to  be  embodied  in  the  designs  on  his  wares.  Special  combs 
are  used  for  the  hair  of  deities  in  many  Indian  temples  to-day,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that 
one  of  these  articles,  reserved  for  this  purpose,  was  actually  venerated  in  centres  of  the 
Harappa  Culture. 

Hide  Motif.  This  name  has  been  given  to  the  motif  on  the  sherd  in  PI.  XXXVII,  13, 
though  whether  the  jar-painter  had  a hide  in  mind  when  he  pictured  it  is  open  to  question. 
A motif  not  unlike  it  was  in  common  use  at  Mohenjo-daro  set  vertically  or  horizontally  in 
broad  borders.^*®  The  same  form  of  ornament  is  sometimes  found  on  Elamite  wares.”® 

Pedestal  Motifs.  This  peculiar  device  though  common  at  Chanhu-daro,  appears  but 
once  at  Mohenjo-daro.”^  It  consists  of  a row  of  objects  shaped  like  hour-glasses  (PL  XXX, 
2-4, 6)  which  closely  resemble  the  cane  stands  in  general  use  in  India  to-day,  frequently 
carried  by  food-vendors  at  railway  stations.  Their  Indian  name  is  modha  and  the  clay  stands 
found  on  many  Sumerian  sites  are  thought  to  be  copies  of  the  same  form.”® 

It  is  possible  that  the  cut  fragments  of  pottery  shown  in  PI.  XXXVIII,  6,  7, 10,  ii 
were  originally  parts  of  stands  resembling  and  almost  contemporary  with  the  tall  pottery 
stands  of  Sumer.”®  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  explain  why  objects  of  this  description 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXIX,  21;  LXX,  7, 40, 41. 

M.  1.  C.,  pis.  LXXXVII,  6,  LXXXIX,  9,  XCI,  13,  14,  16. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  78  (28);  Von  Oppenheim,  Tell  Halaf,  pi.  LIII,  i. 

De  Morgan,  La  Prehistoire  Orientate,  III,  fig.  70. 

AI.  I.  C.,  pis.  LXXXIX,  5,  XCI,  1-6.  Other  examples  of  it  will  be  found  in  Majumdar, 
Explorations  in  Sind,  pis.  XV,  33,  XVI,  21,  XXII,  6.  Childe  regards  it  as  being  derived  from  the 
intersecting  circle  design,  Ancient  Esypt  and  the  East,  1933,  pts.  I,  II,  p.  17. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  XX,  p.  106. 

^^^F.E.M.,  pi.  LXX,  34.  Similar  objects  are  portrayed  on  two  sherds  from  Kohtras  Buthi: 
Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXIX,  31,  35. 

“ A Sumerian  Representation  of  an  Indian  Stand,”  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc.,  1933,  pp.  335' 
338,  pi.  IV. 

For  Sumerian  examples  of  this  cut  ware  see  Frankfort,  Oriental  Institute  Communications, 
No.  20,  1934-35,  pi.  II,  12-14;  Watelin,  Excavations  at  Kish,  IV,  pis.  I;  XVI,  6. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


99 


should  serve  as  motifs  on  Indian  pottery.  Possibly  the  real  articles  were  used  to  support 
sacred  vessels,  a suggestion  which  is  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  their  Sumerian  counter- 
parts have  been  found  in  at  least  one  temple.^®*’  The  Sumerian  word  for  these  clay  stands 
is  masah,  indicating  that  their  prototypes  were  of  reed  form. 

The  significance  of  the  cone-shaped  objects  appearing  on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXX,  5, 
XXXIV,  15,  XXXVI,  32,  XXXVII,  30,  35,  36  is  unknown.  On  the  pottery  they  are  always 
divided  from  one  another  by  vertical  wavy  lines  resembling  serpents  and  particularly  so  in 
Pi.  XXXVII,  30.  The  same  motif,  associated  also  with  snake-like  forms,  is  a prominent 
feature  in  the  decoration  of  a large  jar  from  Susa.^°^ 

Linked  Ball  Motifs.  The  type  of  decoration  shown  on  the  lower  parts  of  Pis.  XXXI, 
20-22,  XXXVI,  4,  29,  39,  XXXVII,  20,  37  invariably  appears  on  a jar  at  the  basal  junction 
of  the  ornamented  and  unornamented  portions.  It  is  found  only  on  large  storage  jars  and 
may  be  a survival  of  the  rope  slings  in  which  some  of  these  vessels  were  carried.  If  this 
be  so,  the  balls  in  the  pattern  may  stand  for  the  knots  in  the  sling.  The  same  device  is 
commonly  found  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  jars  and  on  pottery  of  the  same  period  from  other 
parts  of  Sindh. It  usually  runs  all  round  the  jar,  hut  occasionally,  as  in  PI.  XXXVI.  4, 
alternates  with  simple  loops. 

Scrabble  Markings.  The  markings  illustrated  on  the  sherds  in  Pi.  XXXIV,  13,  16 
are  used  to  cover  considerable  areas  of  large  jars.  They  are  generally  arranged  parallel  to 
one  another  and  may  be  set  vertically,  horizontally,  or  obliquely;  the  rough  way  in  which 
they  are  painted  is  in  effect  good.  A similar  mode  of  decoration  occurs  also  on  the  Mohenjo- 
daro  potteIy^ 

Cruciform  Motifs.  Motifs  in  the  form  of  a cross  are  decidedly  infrequent.  A St. 
Andrew’s  cross  may  be  seen  on  the  painted  jar  in  PI.  XXXIX,  23  (see  also  Pi.  XXIII,  6), 
and  a large  storage  jar  previously  found  by  Mr.  Majumdar  at  Chanhu-daro  also  bears  the 
same  design.”^  This  form  of  cross,  besides  appearing  among  the  signs  of  the  Harappa 
script,^'*  and  on  seals  and  amulets  from  Mohenjo-daro,’^’^  also  occurs  on  two  early  painted 
sherds  from  Samarra.’®”  With  the  exception  of  this  last  ware  it  does  not  appear  to  occur  on 
Sumerian  and  Elamite  pottery,  though  other  forms  of  crosses  are  quite  common.  A St. 
Andrew’s  cross  from  Tal-i-Pir,  Haraj,  in  south-eastern  Persia  forms  part  of  a ver)'  effective 
and  unusual  design. On  Indian  pottery  the  motif  is  painted  in  black  with  a square  white 

150  Pqj  instance  the  Abu  Temple  at  Tell  Asmar. 

De  Morgan,  La  Prehistoire  Orientale,  III,  p.  75,  fig.  no.  For  other  e.xamples  from  Chanhu- 
daro  see  Majumdar,  Exflorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  20,  25,  28. 

Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Surv.  bid.,  1927-28,  pi.  XXVIII,  22;  Explorations  in  Sind,  pis.  XXII,  29, 
XXVI,  14,  XXVllI,  16.  Compare  this  motif  with  one  from  Tepe  Ciyan:  Contenau  et  Chirshman, 
Fouilles  dll  Tepe-Giyan,  pi.  58. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XX,  28.  See  also  pi.  XXVI,  5 for  an  e.xample  from  the  site  of 
Chazi  Shah. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXVI  (ccl.xx.xiii). 

F.E.M..  pl.XC,  14. 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V,  p.  92;  pi.  XXI,  85. 

Stein,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances,  pi.  XXIX  (vi.  25). 


lOO 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


centre,  whereas  on  the  Samarra  and  Persian  wares  it  is  depicted  the  other  way,  namely, 
the  centre  only  is  black  or  red. 

A variation  of  the  design  is  seen  in  PI.  XXXVII,  1 2,  composed  of  four  triangles  with 
the  comers  of  their  bases  touching.  This  form  is  unknown  at  jMohenjo-daro. 

Double  Triangle  Motif.  This  motif  is  frequently  used  as  a border  design  on  the 
wares  of  the  Harappa  people,  and  that  it  was  in  common  use  at  Chanhu-daro  the  sherds 
in  Pis.  XXX,  18,  20, 21,  XXXVII,  7, 9-1 1 will  show.  The  triangles  in  Pis.  XXX,  18  and 
XXXVII,  1 1 differ  from  the  others  in  not  being  completely  filled  in,  while  in  Pi.  XXXVII, 
9-1 1 solar  motifs  are  used  to  fill  the  voids  between  them.  The  same  association  of  a solar 
motif  with  the  double  triangle  is  present  on  at  least  one  piece  of  Elamite  pottery  from  Susa.^®* 

The  setting  of  the  motif  is  usually  vertical  at  Chanhu-daro.  At  Xlohenjo-daro  it  is 
sometimes  horizontal  or  in  alternate  positions.*^’’  When  horizontal,  as  on  the  sherd  in 
PI.  XXXVIII,  2,  it  can  be  likened  to  the  double-axe  symbol  of  Crete,^°°  but  no  claim  to 
relationship  can  he  made,  considering  the  purely  geometric  nature  of  the  motif  and  the 
ease  with  which  it  can  be  drawn. 

Rosettes.  The  four-petalled  rosette  which  is  used  as  a border  pattern  in  Pi.  XXXVII,  14 
is  also  well  known  at  XIohenjo-daro.“^  Outside  India,  this  motif  is  particularly  well 
represented  on  the  wares  of  Tell  Halaf  and  Samarra,^*"  but  it  is  not  found  in  Elam,  except 
on  the  early  seals  of  Susa.^®*  Here,  however,  it  is  set  upright  and  not  in  the  usual  saltaire 
position.  The  rosette  rarely  appears  on  the  pottery  of  Baluchistan,  although  one  very 
unusual  example  of  it  was  unearthed  at  Moghul-ghundai,  painted  in  two  colours  on  a 
black  ground.“^ 

It  seems  unquestionable  that  the  motif  was  evolved,  as  Childe  has  pointed  out,  in 
India  as  well  as  in  Early  Assyria,  from  the  intersecting  circle  pattern,  of  which  PI. 
XXXVII,  41  is  a good  example.  One  bowl  in  particular  from  Arpachiyah  is  almost  covered 
with  these  rosettes  arranged  in  such  a way  as  to  show  the  origin  of  the  pattern.’^  This 
use  of  the  rosette  motif  extended  down  to  the  Jhukar  Period  as  the  sherds  on  Pis.  XLVI,  3, 
XLVIII,  21  will  prove. 

Rhomb  Motifs.  This  simple  pattern,  although  common  on  the  painted  wares  of 
Sumer  and  Elam,  is  seldom  found  on  the  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Period.  One  example 
from  Chanhu-daro  is  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXVII,  1 5,  the  rhombs  being  hatched  in  two  direc- 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  XX,  p.  125. 

i^ALI.  C.,  pi.  XCII,  10,14-17. 

In  this  position  it  appears  amongst  the  signs  on  the  seals:  M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXIII  Ccxxxix). 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XCI,  9-1 1 . 

Mallovvan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  60  (3);  pis.  XV,  XVI,  etc.;  Von  Oppenheim, 
Tell  Halaf,  pi.  LII,  3;  Herzfeld.  Samarra  pis.  XV,  29,  XIX,  78,  XX,  53-55,  XXXII,  219,  224,  XL,  272. 

Delaporte,  Catalogue  des  Cylindres,  I,  pi.  18  C17,  20). 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid.,  No.  37,  pi.  XI  (MM.  N.  26),  XIV  (D.  4). 

165  Egypt  and  the  East,  1933.  pts.  I,  11,  pp.  16,  17. 

166  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  60  (3).  I have  already  referred  to  an  intersecting  circle  pattern  on  a 
sherd  from  Tall  Chagar  Bazar:  Mallowan,  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  pi.  II,  2. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


lOI 


tions  and  enclosed  by  border  lines.  At  Alobenjo-daro  it  is  known  on  only  two  sberds.^°^  It 
was  a favorite  motif  in  tbe  preceding  Amri  Period^®®  and  it  often  appears  on  the  modern 
painted  wares  of  Sindh. 

Single  Hatched  Borders.  The  vertical  lines  used  for  the  hatching  of  this  variety  of 
border  are  wavy  in  PI.  XXX,  14  and  straight  in  Pis.  XXXIV,  12  and  XXXVII,  33,  but  the 
effect  is  much  improved  when  thick  lines  are  employed  as  in  Pis.  XXX,  8,  XXXIV,  12. 
The  leaf-like  markings  in  the  last  example  are  particularly  attractive,  but  none  of  these 
simple  methods  of  filling  a border  is  very  common. 

Double  Hatched  Borders.  Pis.  XXIII,  6,  XXVI,  82,  XXVII,  81,  XXX,  9, 10,  1 5,  19, 
XXXVI,  24,  XXXVII,  30,  33,  43,  48  are  all  examples  of  a favourite  method  of  border  decora- 
tion. It  is  found  most  frequently  on  the  smaller  pieces  of  potter}\  but  the  hatching,  though 
always  oblique,  varies  very  much  in  appearance,  being  in  some  cases  carefully  executed 
and  in  others  roughly. 

Bead  Borders.  This  common  pattern  is  most  often  found  on  the  necks  of  large 
vessels  at  hlohenjo-daro^®®  and  appears  to  be  derived  from  a string  of  beads.  Curiously 
enough,  the  example  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXII,  7 is  the  only  one  that  has  come  to  light  at 
Chanhu-daro. 


Simple  Loop  Patterns.  These,  as  a rule,  are  used  to  decorate  the  inside  edges  of  bowls 
and  dishes  (Pis.  XXX,  19,  XXXIII,  7, 15,  XXXIV,  7,  XXXVI,  13,  XXXVII,  39),  although 
they  are  sometimes  seen  on  the  lower  parts  of  storage  jars  (Pi.  XXXVI,  4). 

A distinctive  form  of  the  loop  pattern  is  often  employed  for  borders  (Pis.  XXIII,  2,  6, 
XXXI,  1 1,  XXXIII,  7, 1 1, 17,  XXXIV,  8, 12, 15,  XXXV,  4,  XXXVI,  1 1, 16, 21, 22,  32).  The 
loops  have  been  converted  into  rows  of  panels  with  curved  tops  or  bases  by  filling  in  the 
requisite  spaces;  the  compartments  so  formed  are  generally  occupied  by  solar  emblems.  On 
one  sherd  from  Mohenjo-daro  hatching  has  been  used  in  place  of  solid  colour.”” 

Loop  patterns  form  a link  between  this  early  pottery  and  the  later  painted  wares  of 
the  Jhukar  Culture,  where  they  are  used  in  multiple  form  to  decorate  the  edges  of  food- 
stands,  as  will  be  seen  in  Pis.  XLII,  1,7,  XLIII,  5,  7,  8,  etc.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
the  edge  of  a dish  was  still  the  favourite  place  for  them. 

Unusual  Motifs.  It  is  difficult  to  identify  the  curious  ball-like  objects  with  a line 
through  them  which  appear  on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XXXI,  14,  XXXVII,  1-3.  They  certainly 
suggest  some  form  of  basket-work  and  may  be  traps  or  cages  of  some  kind.  On  the  other 
hand  they  may  perhaps  be  compared  to  the  cult  object  of  basket  form  which  appears  before 
the  urus  animal  on  some  of  the  seals. 

Summary.  From  this  brief  description  of  the  various  motifs  used  on  the  potter^'  of  the 
Harappa  Culture  at  Chanhu-daro,  it  will  be  noticed  how  plant  forms  predominate  in  the 


M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XCI,  2i;  F.  E.  AL.  pi.  LXVII.  6. 

Alajumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XVllI,  25,  26,  30,  31,  etc. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  LXXXVII,  6,  XC,  21,  XCI,  13,  XCII.  3,  24;  F.  E.  AL,  pis.  LXVIII,  3,  5,  23,  LXX,  13. 
”«M.  I.  C.,  pi.  LXXXIX,  12. 


102 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


scheme  of  decoration.  Even  the  common  intersecting  circle  pattern  may,  on  occasion,  be 
so  elaborated  as  to  convey  the  impression  of  a climbing  plant.  Although  the  plant  motifs 
are,  in  many  cases,  roughly  e.xecuted,  the  effect  produced  is  always  natural  and  lively, 
even  when  a design  is  over-shadowed  by  a wealth  of  detail  in  the  background.  When 
animals  are  present,  they  are,  it  is  true,  sometimes  crude  and  wooden  in  appearance,  but  this 
cannot  be  said  about  many  of  the  birds,  for  the  realism  with  which  they  are  drawn  is 
seldom  equalled  on  ancient  pottery.  A great  deal  of  imaginative  feeling  has  also  gone  into 
their  composition,  the  curious  crests  of  some  of  the  peacocks  being  cases  in  point. 

It  will  be  observed,  too,  that  comparatively  few  of  the  animals  are  in  stereotyped 
positions.  In  most  cases  they  are  performing  natural  actions— the  insect  is  swimming,  the 
fishes  nibbling,  the  squirrel  foraging,  while  the  birds  are  shown  in  their  natural  surroundings 
and  even  feeding  their  young.  This  is  even  more  remarkable  when  the  disadvantages  of 
pottery  as  a medium  of  decoration  are  taken  into  consideration.  Though  few  alterations 
were  possible  and  faulty  work  could  not  be  erased,  tbe  jar-painter  none  the  less  performed 
his  task  with  confidence  and  skill. 

In  present-day  Sindh  it  is  the  men  who  make  and  the  women  who  paint  the 
pottery,^”  and  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  thinking  that  the  credit  for  the  decorating 
of  the  Chanhu-daro  and  allied  wares  should  be  given  to  the  women. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  purely  geometric  style  of  decoration  so  popular  on  the 
wares  of  the  earlier  Amri  and  the  later  Jhukar  Periods  with  the  free  designs  on  the 
Harappa  potter)’  of  Chanhu-daro  and  other  sites.  From  this  alone  we  may  perhaps  assume 
that  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  temporarily  imposed  their  civilization  and  their 
art  on  another  and  distinct  people  who  were  already  in  occupation  of  North-western  India. 
When  in  time  the  Harappa  people  disappeared  or,  possibly,  assimilated  in  the  older 
population,  their  art  would  have  given  place  once  more  to  the  earlier  ideas  and  geometric 
decoration,  though  applied  to  pottery  of  improved  shapes  and  types. 


Harrison  remarks  that  in  the  case  of  hand-made  pottery  the  potter  is  nearly  always  a woman, 
while  the  opposite  holds  good  in  the  case  of  pottery  made  on  the  wheel.  Pots  and  Pans,  p.  34. 


Chapter  VII 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 

This  class  of  pottery  takes  its  name  from  the  site  in  Sindh  where  it  was  first  discovered. 
Early  in  1928,  the  late  Mr.  N.  G.  Majumdar  commenced  a tentative  investigation  of  the 
tw'O  mounds  of  Jhukar  situated  about  six  miles  west  of  the  town  of  Larkanad  and  was 
rewarded  by  the  discovery  of  pottery  and  other  objects  belonging  to  several  cultures. 
Remains  characteristic  of  the  Harappa  Period  were  found  in  the  lower  levels  of  Mound  “ A ” 
at  Jhukar,  but  above  them  lay  other  buildings,  together  with  a new  kind  of  pottery  which 
Mr.  Majumdar  termed  “ Late  Jhukar.” " Still  higher  up  the  mound  evidences  of  a third 
culture,  the  “ Indo-Sassanian,”  first  came  to  light,  but  are  not  the  concern  of  this  book. 

The  makers  of  the  “ Late  Jhukar  ” wares  unearthed  by  Mr.  Majumdar  lived  in  houses 
constructed  of  burnt  brick  similar  to  those  built  by  the  people  of  the  earlier  Harappa 
Culture.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  they  either  reoccupied  deserted  dwellings  of  their 
predecessors  or  re-used  old  material  taken  from  the  levels  below.  In  all  probability  they  did 
both,  as  their  fancy  or  circumstances  dictated.^ 

Soon  after  the  excavation  of  Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro  was  commenced,  convincing 
evidence  came  to  light  that  it  had  been  occupied  by  a people  using  the  same  class  of 
pottery  that  had  been  found  in  the  second,  or  middle,  stratum  at  Jhukar.  On  both  sites  the 
pottery  was  discov^ered  in  levels  just  above  those  containing  remains  of  the  Harappa 
Culture,  and  there  remains,  therefore,  no  doubt  that  the  makers  of  this  Jhukar  pottery 
were  the  immediate  successors  of  the  Harappa  people,  whose  buildings  and  other  remains 
lay  below. 

The  pottery  and  other  objects  of  the  Jhukar  period  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  did 
not,  however,  come  exclusivelv  from  the  upper  levels  of  Mound  II.  In  some  cases  the 
weathering  of  the  mound  had  caused  material  to  be  washed  down  its  slopes  and  sometimes 
Jhukar  material  actually  lay  below  later  deposited  Harappa  remains.  These  facts  must 
be  borne  in  mind  when  the  catalogue  at  the  end  of  this  book  is  consulted  as  they  explain 
why  objects  belonging  to  the  same  culture  come  from  such  different  levels.  It  is  only  when 
a mound  has  been  well  penetrated  or  sliced  that  a true  perspective  of  its  contents  can  be 
obtained.^ 

Some  Differences  Between  the  Jhukar  and  Harappa  Wares 

(0  The  Jhukar  painted  pottery  is  usually  decorated  in  two  colours,  red  and  black, 

^ Explorations  in  Sind  CHem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.'),  No.  48,  pp.  5-18. 

- Mr.  Majumdar's  “ Early  Jhukar  ” potter\'  is  now  identified  with  that  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 

® At  Chanhu-daro  they  acted  in  the  same  way. 

^ The  lowest  level  at  which  a piece  of  Jhukar  pottery  was  found  (PI.  XLVI,  35)  was  5.8  ft.  helow 
datum  in  the  “ Great  Cutting.” 

103 


104 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


excluding  the  slip,  while  the  Harappa  pottery  is  alw^ays  in  monochrome,  i.  e.,  black  on  a 
red  slip.'^ 

(2)  The  designs  and  motifs  on  the  Jhukar  pottery  are  entirely  different  from  those  of 
the  earlier  wares.  In  the  case  of  the  Jhukar  the  style  is  geometric,  in  that  of  the  other, 
naturalistic. 

(3)  The  fabrics  of  the  Jhukar  people  are  coarser  and  more  porous  than  those  of 
their  predecessors.  The  firing  of  the  pottery  is  also  inferior. 

(4)  The  red  slips  employed  on  some  of  the  Jhukar  pottery  are  not  always  polished; 
when  a polished  slip  is  used,  it  has  not  the  careful  finish  of  the  earlier  wares,  while  the 
pigment  used  is  of  a much  brighter  tint.  The  cream-coloured  slips,  which  are  always 
thickly  laid,  have  a peculiar  straw-pitted  surface,  a feature  entirely  absent  on  the 
Harappa  wares. 

Clays 

The  Jhukar  pottery  is  made  from  a clay  that  burns  pink  in  the  furnace  and  in  this 
respect  it  resembles  most  of  the  Harappa  fabrics.  Mica  and  lime  were  the  principal 
tempering  materials,  the  latter  occurring  in  quite  large  particles.  Sometimes  a drab-coloured 
body  is  found,  the  sherds  and  vessels  in  Pis.  XXXIX,  14,  XL,  13,  15,  16,  21, 24,  25,  XLI,  33, 
XLVI,  38,  XLVIII,  65,  all  being  of  this  colour.  No  grey  ware  seems  to  have  been 
manufactured  in  this  period. 

Hand-made  Pottery 

Hand-made  vessels  were  found  in  some  numbers  and  formed  about  the  same  propor- 
tion of  the  total  number  of  finds  as  in  the  preceding  period.  They  are  mainly  of  specialized 
types,  as  Pis.  XXXIX,  1 1-14;  XL,  15, 16,  18,  23-25,  27,  32,  XLI,  18,  23,  32,  33,  43,  XLVIII, 
2 show,  and  were  probably  made  in  the  homes  of  their  owners.  The  remainder  of  the 
potteiv3  both  painted  and  unpainted,  was  raised  on  a quick  wheel.  A cord,  as  in  the 
previous  period,  was  sometimes  used  to  separate  a vessel  from  the  wheel,  the  marks  it  made 
being  particularly  noticeable  in  the  vessels  show'n  in  Pis.  XL,  29,  XLI,  27,  31. 

Firino 

O 

It  is  possible  that  the  Jhukar  pottery  w^as  baked  in  trenches  or  pits  heaped  over  with 
brushwood  or  straw.  This  is  still  a common  practice  in  Sindh  to-day,  and  it  would  account 
for  the  curious  straw'-marks  that  disfigure  some  of  the  slips.  The  firing  is  sometimes  very 
indifferent.  The  sherds  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXXIV,  21,  XLI,  10,  33,  XLV,  35,  37,  XLVI,  31, 
XLVII,  1 5,  and  XLVIII,  20,  all  have  dark,  underbaked  cores,  a fault  which  is  rarely 
encountered  in  the  Harappa  pottery.® 

® I exclude  certain  polychrome  wares  which  otherwise  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  Jhukar  pottery. 

" Similar  under-baked  interiors  have  been  noted  in  vessels  from  Periano-ghundai.  The  pottery 
from  this  site  somewhat  resembles  Jhukar  work;  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  p.  34,  pi.  V. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


Trimming 

The  lower  portions  of  some  of  the  vessels  show  signs  of  having  been  trimmed.  This  is 
especially  noticeable  in  the  specimens  shown  in  Pis.  XXXIV,  22,  XL,  14,  XLI,  28,  34, 40,  44, 
45,  while  the  upper  part  of  the  large  jar  seen  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  i was  heavily  pared  when 
the  clay  w’as  almost  dr\'.  It  is  difficult  to  say,  however,  whether  this  procedure  w'as  followed 
as  extensively  as  it  was  in  the  Harappa  Period,  for  so  few  pieces  of  Jhukar  work  have  been 
found  intact. 

Make 

The  greater  number  of  sherds  and  vessels  are  of  substantial  thickness,  although  no 
heavier  than  some  specimens  of  Harappa  pottery.  Quite  thin  vessels  were  also  manu- 
factured, the  pieces  illustrated  in  Pis.  XLI,  41,  XLII,  4,  19,  20,  XLIV,  5,  XLV,  36,  39, 
XLVI,  24,  33,  34,  XLVII,  6,  and  XLVIII,  i all  being  examples  of  this  description.  No.  39  in 
PI.  XLV  is^  photograph  of  part  of  a large  storage  jar.  This  is  an  unusual  sherd,  not  only 
because  of  its  surprising  thinness,  but  also  because,  as  its  inner  side  clearly  shows,  a paddle 
was  used  to  consolidate  the  clay.  A thick  deposit  of  sand,  a portion  of  which  is  just  visible 
in  the  photograph,  had  originally  been  laid  over  the  lower  part  of  the  jar  to  help  keep  its 
contents  cool.^ 

Plain  Wares 

An  examination  of  the  catalogue  at  the  end  of  this  book  will  show  that  a great  deal  of 
this  pottery  is  unpainted;  indeed,  about  two-thirds  of  the  Jhukar  vessels  and  sherds  found 
at  Chanhu-daro  are  undecorated.  Hand-made  vessels  are  never  painted,  though  they  are 
commonly  covered  with  a slip  of  some  kind. 

Slips 

Slips  are  not  always  present  on  the  unpainted  pottery,  specially  in  the  case  of  the 
hand-made  specimens.  The  sherds  illustrated  in  Pis.  XLIV,  6,  XLVII,  24, 27  are  also 
without  a slip,  though  painted  in  one  or  two  colours. 

Cream-coloured  Slips.  Slips  of  this  colour  are  the  most  common  of  all  and  occur 
on  painted  as  well  as  on  unpainted  pottery.  They  never  seem  to  have  been  polished  and 
have  sometimes  been  applied  so  thickly  that  they  are  inclined  to  scale.  They  are  also 
ver)f  absorbent,  for  sometimes  paint  applied  to  them  has  penetrated  to  the  pottery  under- 
neath. Examples  of  this  slip  appear  in  Frontispiece  (b),  i,  3,  4,  8,  9,  10.® 

Red  Slips.  Red  slips  are  also  common,  but  the  shades  of  this  colour  are  not  quite  the 
same  as  those  used  on  the  w^ares  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  Sometimes  the  slip  is  polished, 
sometimes  unpolished,  although  in  the  latter  case  it  is  not  ahvays  easy  to  say  whether  the 
lack  of  this  hnish  is  deliberate  or  caused  by  the  action  of  the  soil.  These  red  slips  vary  in 

^ It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  a similar  sand  coating  is  present  on  some  of  the  storage 
jars  of  the  Harappa  Period. 

® Even  the  ink  used  to  mark  our  finds  in  the  field  had  a tendency  to  mn  on  this  kind  of  slip. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


io6 


tint  between  an  orange  and  a cherry?  red,  and  the  fact  that  they  differ  from  those  on  the 
older  pottery  may  be  because  of  imperfect  baking  or  because  the  ochre  used  came  from 
another  source. 

The  broad  horizontal  red  bands  decorating  so  much  of  the  Jhukar  pottery  are  applied 
on  top  of  the  body  slips.  For  this  reason  they  are  included  among  the  paints  in  the 
catalogue,  although  they  cover  considerable  areas  on  much  of  the  potter)'. 

Red  slips  are  the  sole  decoration  of  the  vessels  illustrated  in  Pi.  XLI,  34,  39,  40, 46. 
In  the  first  two  examples,  this  slip  extends  only  as  far  down  as  the  carinated  portion;  below 
this  the  surface  has  been  left  bare.  No.  48  in  the  same  plate  has  been  similarly  treated, 
but  here  the  base  bears  a cream-coloured  wash.  As  a general  rule  the  red  slips  serve  as  a 
ground  for  linear  markings  or  designs  painted  in  black,  purplish-black,  or  purple.  The 
bowls  in  PI.  XL,  22,  31  are  ornamented  in  this  way,  the  first  very  irregularly.  Two  examples 
in  colour  of  the  same  black  on  red  are  shown  in  Frontispiece  (b),  5,6,  both  pieces  illustrated 
belong  apparently  to  the  same  bowl. 

The  fragments  of  food-stand  dishes  seen  in  Pis.  XLI,  2,  XLIV,  12,  15,  XLV,  22,  31, 
XLVI,  I,  4,  7,  17,  39,  43,  XLVII,  5,  16,  30  bear  a red  slip  on  their  inner  faces  only  and  are 
coloured  pink  outside.  Other  sherds  from  similar  dishes  and  also  the  small  bowl  in  Pi. 
XLVII,  25  have  cream-coloured  exteriors  and  red  interiors." 

Two  slips,  a red  and  a cream,  are  found  beside  each  other  inside  the  fragments  of  dishes 
shown  in  Pis.  XLIII,  8,  XLVI,  16.  The  outside  of  these  pieces  bears  the  second  colour  only 
and  the  same  combination  occurs  on  the  two  jars  in  PI.  XLI,  28,  36,  the  last  having  three 
black  spots  painted  on  one  side.  A red  and  a pink  slip  are  found  on  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XLV,  33, 
both  serving  as  a ground  for  various  motifs  in  a purple-coloured  paint.  Slips  of  the  same  two 
shades  appear  on  the  almost  perfect  jar  illustrated  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (b),  2. 

Pink  Sli-ps.  These  slips  are  very  numerous,  the  tint  being  particularly  decided  on  the 
vessels  and  sherds  in  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  2,  7,  XLI,  27,  XLV,  27.  Sometimes  this  coloured 
slip  apparently  covered  the  entire  jar  or  dish,^"  while  in  other  cases  it  is  applied  to  the  interior 
only,  the  outside  being  of  another  colour.  “ Of  the  reverse  procedure  only  three  examples 
have  come  to  light,  namely  the  base  of  the  food-stand  in  PI.  XLI,  1 5 and  the  fragments  of 
dishes  in  Pis.  XL,  26,  XLV,  37.^" 

A pink-coloured  slip  is  used  on  the  inside  of  the  dish  in  Pi.  XXXIV,  18,  the  exterior 
of  this  piece  bearing  no  slip  at  all. 

Grey  Slips.  The  fragments  of  painted  pottery  seen  in  Pis.  XLV,  30,  41,  XLVII,  3 
appear  at  first  sight  to  be  covered  with  a grey  slip,  but  closer  examination  will  show  that  the 
grey  is  caused  by  accidental  burning. 


' Pis.  XXXIV,  17, 21,  XLI,  12, 14, 25,  XLII,  25,  XLIII,  4, 7, 10,  XLIV,  13,  XLV,  25,  26,  XLVI,  6, 


8,  12,  16,  27,  41,  XLVIII,  23. 

Pis.  XXXIV,  22,  XXXIX,  9,  XL,  28,  XLI,  13,  i9>  20,  27,  35.  45,  XLII,  12,  19,  XLIII,  9,  XLV,  24, 
28,29,42,  XLVI,  3,  23, 28,  XLVII,  8,  10,  13.  No.  24  in  PI.  XLV  is  reproduced  in  colour  in 


Frontispiece  (b),  7. 

“ Pis.  XL,  20,  XLIV,  10,  XLV,  27,  XLVI,  5,  9,  XLVII,  7,  17.  The  exterior  slip  is  cream-coloured. 
The  interior  of  these  dishes  is  cream-coloured. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


107 


Yellow  Slips.  A slip  of  a decided  yellow  colour  decorates  the  large  storage  jar  in 
PL  XLI,  49,  which  piece  is  shown  in  situ  in  PL  XLVII,  34.  Although  the  colour  may  he  due 
to  accident,  it  may  be  remembered  that  slips  in  this  colour  are  sometimes  found  on  the 
polychrome  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Period,  one  example  being  illustrated  in  PL  XXXVI,  23. 

Paints 

Red  and  black  are  the  two  main  colours  used  in  the  decoration  of  the  Jhukar  pottery; 
red  for  the  broad  horizontal  bands  so  characteristic  of  this  ware  and  black  for  edging  these 
bands  as  well  as  for  the  motifs  and  patterns.  Sometimes  the  black  has  a distinct  purple 
tinge,  while  in  other  cases  a decided  purple  is  employed.  The  designs  in  Pis.  XXXIX,  9, 
XLI,  4,  35,  XLII,  6,  13,  XLV,  20,  36,  XLVI,  23,  26,  XLVII,  7,  9 are  executed  in  a brown- 
coloured  paint.^® 

Only  two  of  these  colours  are  used  to  decorate  a single  vessel,  though  three  or  more 
shades  of  the  same  colour  frequently  appear.^^  For  instance,  the  red  used  for  a pattern  may 
differ  slightly  in  tint  from  that  of  the  bands  on  a jar.^^  Again,  the  motif  on  the  sherd  in 
PL  XXXIV,  21  is  painted  in  dark  red  on  a light  red  slip,  while  the  light  red  chequers 
in  PL  XLII,  20  are  outlined  in  a darker  shade. 

Examples  of  bichrome  ware  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  ornamented  in  mono- 
chrome, principally  because  highly  decorated  foodstands  were  very  popular  with  the 
Jhukar  people.  Storage  jars  painted  in  two  colours  were  also  preferred  to  the  plainer  kinds. 
The  decoration  of  the  monochrome  pottery  is  usually  simple,  consisting  of  plain  lines  and 
borders  in  red,^®  purple,  black,  or  brown.^’ 

Earth  colours  only  were  employed;  red  ochre  for  making  the  various  shades  of  red 
and  a manganiferous  haematite  for  the  blacks  and  purples.  The  browns  may  have  been 
prepared  from  another  haematite  or  by  mixing  two  colours  together. 

In  some  cases  the  colours  were  applied  with  mops  of  various  sizes.  Sometimes  the 
jar-painter  used  a fine  brush,  probably  made  from  the  teased-out  end  of  a twig,  although  it 
is  not  impossible  that  proper  brushes  of  hair  were  expressly  made  for  this  purpose.  The 
absorbent  nature  of  some  of  the  slips  made  it  necessary  to  use  a liberal  quantity  of  paint 
and  this  sank  into  the  ground,  so  that  the  slight  relief  effect  so  common  on  the  Harappa 
wares  is  seldom  present  on  the  Jhukar  vessels.  All  the  paints  have  a matt  surface  and  there 
are  no  indications  that  any  binding  substance  was  mixed  with  them. 

The  red  bands  that  make  this  potteiy^  so  distinctive  are,  in  many  cases,  so  regularly 
drawn  that  there  is  reason  to  think  each  jar  must  have  been  set  on  a turn-table  for  the 
purpose.  The  wheel  that  was  used  to  raise  the  vessel  may  have  been  employed  for  this 
purpose.  The  women  who  paint  the  decorated  pottery  that  is  still  made  in  various  parts  of 
Sindh  use  a wooden  block  pivoted  on  a stone  or  piece  of  brick,  and  so  great  is  their  skill 

No.  20  in  PL  XLV  is  illustrated  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (b),  10. 

The  slip  colour  is  excluded  in  every  case. 

Noticeable  in  Pis.  XXXIX.  15,  XL,  26,  XLI,  2,  XLII,  16,  Frontispiece  (b),  9. 

Pis.  XXXIX,  9,  XL,  12. 

" Pis.  XL,  19,  20,  22,  28,  31,  XLI,  35,  36,  41,  XLII,  4-  Frontispiece  (b),  5,  6. 


io8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


with  this  simple  apparatus  that  they  can  draw  a line  round  a jar  so  that  its  ends  meet 
exactly/^ 

It  seems  likely  that  some  of  the  designs  on  the  Jhukar  pottery  were  carefully 
measured,  if  not  outlined  beforehand,  before  they  were  painted.  No.  1 2 in  Pi.  XLIII 
looks  much  too  regular  to  have  been  entirely  free-hand  work  and  the  same  applies  to  No.  6 
in  Pi.  XLVII.  This  process  is,  however,  not  a new  departure,  for  some  of  the  painted 
designs  on  the  Harappa  pottery^  are  also  extraordinarily  regular,  as,  for  instance,  the 
pattern  on  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XXXVII,  40. 

Potmarks 

Potmarks  are  rare.  On  the  bach  of  the  dish  in  PI.  XLVII,  12,  a rough  cross  (shown 
in  No.  31  in  the  same  plate)  is  painted  in  purplish-black.  The  three  irregular  black  spots 
on  the  jar  in  Pi.  XLI,  36  seem  in  this  case  to  be  identification  marks,  though  similar  spots 
on  the  small  vessel  shown  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (b),  2 are  arranged  in  four  sets  at  equal 
distances  round  the  jar  and  here  obviously  intended  as  an  ornament.^® 

A very  conventional  tree  is  deeply  scratched  on  the  base  of  the  food-  or  jar-stand 
shown  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  4,  but  this  may  have  been  meant  as  a decoration.  A cross-like  marking, 
part  of  which  is  missing,  is  heavily  incised  on  the  side  of  the  vessel  in  PI.  XLVIII,  19,  but 
as  the  edge  and  interior  of  this  broken  specimen  are  deeply  scored,  the  symbol,  apparently 
a Greek  cross,  is  a decorative  feature  and  not  a true  potmark. 

One  can  be  more  definite  concerning  the  incised  markings  shown  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  20. 
These  were  placed  opposite  to  one  another  inside  the  dish  of  an  unpainted  stand,  which 
appears  in  line  in  Pi.  XLI,  10.  The  four-petalled  rosette  cut  on  the  sherd  in  PI.  XLVIII,  21 
also  seems  to  be  a true  potmark. 

Incised  and  Relief  Work 

The  incised  work  carried  out  in  the  Jhukar  Period  is  entirely  difFerent  from  that  of 
the  earlier  material.  No  complete  examples  have  yet  been  found  and  the  majority  of  the 
sherds  shown  in  PI.  XLVIII  come  from  iars  of  varying  sizes.  With  the  exception  of  No.  2, 
all  the  sherds  shown  come  from  wheel-made  pottery. 

The  jar-cover  appearing  in  Pi.  XL,  17  has  its  rim  and  knob  handle  roughly  incised, 
the  first  with  a wavy  line  and  the  second  with  crossed  lines  similar  to  those  scored  on  the 
knob  handle  in  PI.  XLVIII,  13.  The  top  of  the  rim  of  the  large  jar-stand  in  Pi.  XL,  30  is 
ornamented  with  wavy  parallel  lines  made  with  some  toothed  instrument,  while  the 
interior  of  the  same  vessel  is  vertically  partitioned  with  similar  lines  set  at  intervals  with 
about  4.7  inches  between  each  group.  The  sherd  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  19,  is  incised  in  the  same 
way  on  the  top  edge,  and  inside  it  has  been  scored  all  over  in  a very  regular  and  careful 
manner  with  some  tool  resembling  a comb. 

Nos.  II,  13,  17,  22  in  Pi.  XLVIII  are  knobs  from  jar-covers  of  the  type  illustrated  in 
Pi.  XLI,  18,  23,  which  seem  to  have  been  expressly  made  for  large  jars  only.  The  star  with 

“ Painted  pottery  in  Modern  Sind,”  Journ.  Roy.  Anihro'p.  Inst.,  Vol.  LX,  pp.  127-135. 

“ This  jar  (No.  5164)  was  found  at  locus  484  in  the  “ Great  Cutting  ” at  the  level  — 1.4  ft. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


109 


five  rays  cut  on  No.  17  is  reminiscent  of  the  solar  patterns  so  common  on  the  painted 
Harappa  wares  (PL XXXIII,  10,  ii,  15, 17, etc.),  and  the  spiral  on  No.  ii  recalls  some  of 
the  incised  patterns  found  on  the  dishes  of  food-stands  belonging  also  to  the  earlier  period 
(PI.  XXXVIII,  19,21,25). 

Plate  XLVllL  No.  I in  Pi.  XLVIII  is  thinly  made  and  was  once  part  of  the  rim 
and  neck  of  a large  storage  jar.  The  surface  of  the  clay  has  been  roughened  by  paring 
when  it  was  almost  dry  and  the  surface  thus  formed  has  been  impressed  with  a series  of 
oblique  strokes  more  or  less  regularly  arranged.  A deep  zig-zag  line  also  ornaments  the  neck. 

The  only  example  of  relief  decoration  is  illustrated  in  No.  2.  This  is  a portion  of  a 
hand-made  howl  with  an  unpierced  lug  projecting  from  one  side.'®  The  neck  of  this 
interesting  fragment  w'hich  measures  3.4  inches  long  is  roughly  ornamented  with  flat  over- 
lapping pellets  of  clay,  a mode  of  decoration  foreign  to  any  other  Indian  pottery  of 
early  date.^^ 

The  four  sherds.  Nos.  3, 10,  18, 24,  come  from  different  jars.  The  first  and  last  of  these 
have  a portion  of  the  surface  horizontally  divided  into  ledges,  which,  in  the  case  of  No.  24, 
average  0.32  inch  in  depth.  They  are  pitted  at  regular  intervals  with  blind  holes,  which 
produce  a most  curious  effect.  Nos.  10  and  18  are  also  decorated  with  a row  of  metopes 
made  with  some  serrated  instrument.  No.  24  was  probably  once  ornamented  in  the 
same  way. 

The  fragments  of  the  large  storage  jars  No.  5-9, 12, 14-16,  all  bear  incised  patterns  of 
various  kinds.  The  strange  motif  appearing  on  Nos.  6 and  1 6,  is,  perhaps,  intended  to 
represent  fish.  No.  25,  part  of  a coarsely  made  jar,  has  no  less  than  three  kinds  of 
ornamentation;  a cord  impression,  two  lines  of  deeply  incised  zig-zags,  and,  above  and 
below  these,  ribbing. 

Round  the  outside  of  the  pan  No.  23  are  no  less  than  eight  spiral  cord  impressions. 
These  are  so  carefully  arranged  that  they  must  have  been  intended  as  a decoration,  for  it 
would  have  been  unnecessary  to  bind  this  vessel  so  regularly  merely  to  guard  against  its 
cracking  while  being  dried.  The  spouted  jar  in  PI.  XLI,  44,  which  is  not  of  large  size  and 
therefore  unlikely  to  have  cracked,  bears  four  similar  lines  of  cord  impressions. 

The  marks  of  a cord  may  also  be  seen  on  the  lower  portion  of  the  medium-sized 
jar  illustrated  in  colour  in  the  Frontispiece  (b),  8 and  again  in  photograph  in  PI.  XLVI,  33, 
34.  Sometimes  the  vertical  edges  of  food-stand  dishes  bear  such  cord  impressions.  No.  4 in 
PI.  XLI  and  two  similar  dishes  not  illustrated  being  examples  of  this  technique." 

In  some  cases,  therefore,  it  seems  likely  enough  that  cord  markings  were  intended 
to  be  decorative  and  in  others  they  served  their  original  utilitarian  purpose.  Cord  impres- 
sions sometimes  appear  on  the  potter}^  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  but  always  on  those  of  large 
size  which  did  need  a certain  amount  of  binding  to  prevent  fissures  in  the  drying  process.^® 

There  was  probably  a second  lug  on  the  opposite  side  of  this  bowl  like  that  in  Pis.  XL,  23. 

The  nearest  approach  to  this  type  of  decoration  is  to  be  found  on  sherds  from  North  Baluchistan, 
which,  however,  appear  to  be  of  later  date:  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  37,  pis.  I,  XIV,  XV. 

22  Nos.  2088  and  2141. 

=3  M.  1.  C.,  p.  291;  F.  E.  M.,  p.  212. 


I lO 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Ring-hases 

A vessel  with  a ring-base  is  as  rare  in  the  Jhukar  Period  as  in  earlier  times.  In  the  case 
of  the  three  examples  that  we  are  able  to  illustrate  (Pis.  XL,  19,  31,  XLI,  17)  the  base  has 
been  made  separately  and  the  joining  has  been  done  so  carefully  that  it  is  difficult  to  detect 
it.  The  foot  of  the  hne  chalice  in  PL  XLI,  26  hardly  comes  in  this  category  nor  do  the 
lower  portions  of  the  food-stands  so  popular  with  the  Jhukar  people. 


Pottery  Types 

A fair  proportion  of  the  Jhukar  fragments  were  sufficiently  preserved  to  allow  us  to 
ascertain  the  original  shape  of  the  vessels  of  which  they  once  formed  a part.  The  forms  we 
were  able  to  restore  in  Pis.  XXXIX,  XL,  and  XLI  are,  however,  too  few  in  number  for 
anything  but  a rough  classihcation  and  a more  systematic  arrangement  must  wait  until 
further  material  of  the  same  culture  has  come  to  light. 


Food-stands  and  their  Dishes  (Pis.  XL,  12,  13,  26,  XLI,  2-6,  10-16,  19-22,  24,  25,  XLII,  i,  7, 
XLIII,  1, 3, 5-8,  XLV,  35,  XLVI,4o,  42, 45,  XLVIJ,  30, 31,  XLVIII,  20, 2^) 


The  Jhukar  people  at  Chanhu-daro  used  both  the  tall  and  squat  type  of  food-stand, 
but,  unfortunately,  not  a single  specimen  has  survived  intact."^  Fragments  of  the  dishes 
belonging  to  these  stands  were  found  scattered  about  the  upper  levels  of  Mound  II  and 
one  or  two  sherds  lay  high  up  on  Mound  1.  Most  of  the  painted  sherds  seen  in  Pis.  XLII, 
XLIII,  XLIV,  XLV,  XLVI,  XLVII  are  parts  of  food-stand  dishes  whose  sturdier  stems  and 
bases  have  more  or  less  survived  injury.  As  explained  in  the  previous  chapter  the  dish  of  a 
Harappa  stand  was  always  made  separately  from  the  stem  and  base  and  then  joined  together 
before  the  parts  had  dried.  This  technique  was  also  adopted  by  the  Jhukar  potter  and 
explains  the  reason  why,  when  breakage  did  occur,  the  dish  nearly  always  came  away  from 
the  lower  part  of  the  stand. 

These  Jhukar  utensils  were  elaborately  decorated  in  several  colours,  the  bulk  of  the 
ornamentation  being  confined  to  the  interior  of  the  dish.  The  exterior  parts  of  the  latter 
and  the  stems  and  bases  are  painted  with  simple  lines  in  monochrome  (Pi.  XLI,  21, 22) 
or  with  broad  bands  of  red  paint,  edged  with  black  or  purple  lines  (Pis.  XLI,  13,  19,  20, 
24,25,  XLVII,  30,  31). 

Similar  red  bands,  indicated  in  the  line  drawings  by  stippling,  frequently  divide  the 
inside  of  a dish  into  two  or  three  zones,  as  in  Pis.  XLII,  i,  7,  XLIII,  i,  3,  6,  XLVI,  42, 45. 
The  band  or  bands  on  the  exteriors  are  always  situated  close  to  the  margin  of  the  dish 
(Pis.  XL,  26,  XLVII,  30,  31);  sometimes  they  do  not  appear  at  all,  thin  lines  in  purple  or 
black  being  substituted  for  them."'"  The  dish  in  PI.  XLI,  10,  is  remarkable  for  its  lack  of 
decoration,  there  being  substituted  for  it  two  incised  markings  (shown  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  20) 


This  was  also  the  case  at  Jhukar  and  Lohumjo-daro  where  fragments  of  these  stands  were 
found:  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind  QM.em.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  48),  pis.  XVI,  22,  XXII,  28. 
This  was  the  case  with  the  dishes  illustrated  in  Pis.  XLIII,  5,  XLV,  35,  XLVI,  40,  45. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


III 


cut  on  opposite  sides  of  its  interior.  As  mentioned  before,  the  sole  decoration  of  the  dish 
in  PI.  XLVIII,  23  consists  of  string  markings  round  its  outer  surface. 

Pis.  XL,  12,26,  XLI,  2-6,  10-12, 14,  XLVIII,  23  show  how  the  dishes  of  these  food- 
stands  vary  in  shape.  Those  having  wide,  flat,  or  nearly  flat  rims  have  this  portion  decorated 
with  multiple  loops,  as  shown  in  PI.  XLIII,  5-8,  etc. 

A ver)'  curious  type  of  dish  appears  in  Pi.  XL,  12,  the  upper  part  of  which  is  missing. 
Its  exterior  is  decorated  with  a cream-coloured  slip  upon  which  is  painted  a chequer  pattern 
in  dark  red,  each  red  square  alternating  with  one  the  colour  of  the  ground.  Underneath 
this  dish  is  a break,  showing  where  the  stem  had  once  been,  and  this  is  surrounded  with 
twelve  painted  concentric  circles. 

It  is  a moot  point  whether  these  food-stands  were  inspired  by  the  earlier  Harappa 
specimens,  for  they  are  common  to  many  cultures."®  As  I have  said  before,  the  Jhukar 
examples  bear  a resemblance,  as  far  as  shape  is  concerned,  to  some  of  the  Harappa  stands, 
but  the  way  in  which  they  are  decorated  is  entirely  different.  It  is  as  yet  impossible  to 
say  whether  they  were  in  ordinary  household  use  or  reserved  for  religious  purposes;  the 
fact  that  not  a single  specimen  has  been  found  complete  may  have  had  nothing  to  do  with 
any  ritual  aftermath."^ 

Footed  Vessels  (Pis.  Frontispiece  (h),  2,  XXXIX,  10,  XL,  19,  20,  31,  XLI,  26,  27,  38,) 

This  type  of  vessel  occurs  in  various  forms.  No.  19  in  Pi.  XL  is  coated  with  a cream 
slip.  On  the  outside  a dark  purple  band  decorates  its  rim,  while  inside  are  three  irregular 
lines  in  the  same  colour.  This  interesting  bowl  was  found  resting  on  top  of  the  wall  at 
the  South-western  corner  of  room  1 37  in  Square  9/E. 

No.  20  in  Pi.  XL  is  coloured  pink  inside,  and  on  the  outside  is  decorated  with  thin 
purple  lines  on  a cream  slip.  It  is  not  particularly  well  finished,  both  surfaces  being  rather 
rough.  No.  31  in  the  same  plate  is  coated  with  a polished  red  slip  and  further  ornamented 
with  lines  in  black  paint. 

The  cup  in  Pi.  XLI,  26,  a beautiful  specimen  with  rather  a high  base,  is  undecorated; 
even  the  customary  slip  is  absent.  No.  27,  beside  it,  is  covered  with  a bright  pink  slip,  which 
has  trickled  down  in  places  over  the  foot.  The  base  of  the  latter  bears  the  marks  left  by 
the  string  used  to  sever  it  from  the  wheel.  Similar  chalice  forms  appear  among  the  pottery 
of  the  Harappa  Period  and  are  illustrated  in  PI.  XXV,  44,  45.'®  Frankfort  and  Speiser 
suggest  that  the  chalices  found  on  Mesopotamian  and  Assyrian  sites  have  an  Anatolian- 
Transcaucasian  origin,"®  but  it  is  a matter  of  surmise  how  this  type  of  vessel  reached  India, 
although  it  is  significant  that  chalices  have  come  to  light  on  sites  in  Baluchistan  and  are 

“ See  Fleure  and  Peake  in  Joiirn.  Roy.  Anthrop.  Inst.,  1930,  p.  52.  They  mention  Egypt,  Meso- 
potamia, Asia  Minor,  Crete,  Sicily,  Bosnia,  and  Spain  as  countries  where  such  stands  have  been  found. 

I hint  at  the  ancient  and  modem  custom  in  India  and  elsewhere,  of  breaking  vessels  that  have 
served  any  religious  purpose,  to  avoid  being  later  put  to  improper  use. 

See  also  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXI,  74,  LXVI,  29,  49. 

E.  A.  Speiser.  The  Pottery  of  Tell  Billa,  Museum  Journ.,  Univ.  Mus.,  Philadelphia,  Vol. 
XXIII,  p.  267. 


I 12 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


there  classed  among  the  early  •wares.®'’  It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  type  found  its 
way  to  the  Harappa  people  through  South-eastern  Persia  and  Baluchistan,  if,  indeed,  the 
Harappa  folk  did  not  bring  it  with  them.  Whether  the  Wpe  was  handed  down  to  the 
Jhukar  people  or  re-introduced  by  them  must  await  further  investigation. 

The  curious  specimen  in  Pi.  XLI,38  (also  shown  in  photograph  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  lo) 
is  ornamented  with  a wide  band  of  loops  and  spots  in  dark  purple  on  a cream-coloured 
ground,  while  above  and  below  this  bold  pattern  are  wide  strips  of  red  edged  with 
purplish  black.  Unfortunately,  the  rim  of  this  jar  is  missing,  but  it  was  probably  coloured 
the  same  shade  of  purple  as  the  neck.  Vessels  of  similar  shape  have  been  found  on  the 
Jhukar  mound,®^  and  another  came  to  light  in  one  of  the  Harappa  levels  at  Chanhu-daro 
(Pi.  XXVII,  68).  This  last  example,  however,  differs  entirely  from  the  Jhukar  jar  described 
above  in  style  of  decoration. 

The  small  jar,  2.5  inches  in  height,  shown  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (h),  2,  probably 
once  had  a base  resembling  that  of  PI.  XLI,  38.  It  w'as  unearthed  from  locus  484  in  the 
“ Great  Cutting  ” at  the  level  — 1.4  feet. 

Sfouted  Vessels  (Pi.  XLI,  44, 45) 

Both  these  interesting  vessels  have  lost  their  rims.  No.  44  is  well  made  but  is  without 
a slip  and  its  lower  portion  shows  signs  of  having  been  pared.  Four  spiral  cord  markings 
round  its  widest  part  may  be  an  attempt  at  decoration;  a jar  of  this  size  would  hardly  have 
needed  protection  while  drying.  Part  of  the  spout  is  missing,  the  hole  through  it  at  the 
break  measuring  0.3  inch  in  diameter.  No.  45  is  covered  with  a pink  slip  and,  as  in  No.  44, 
the  lower  portion  and  base  have  been  trimmed.  The  upper  portion  is  exceptionally 
well  finished. 

These  tw'O  pieces  are  the  only  examples  of  their  kind  found  at  Chanhu-daro  and 
have  been  assigned  to  the  Jhukar  Period  because  No.  44  was  found  at  a high  level  in 
Alound  II.®®  They  may,  of  course,  have  been  importations,  but  in  shape  they  do  not 
resemble  those  of  contemporary  Sumer,  nor  can  they  be  compared  with  the  spouted  vessels 
discovered  by  Sir  Aurel  Stein  in  Baluchistan. 

Jar-covers  (Pis.  XXXIX, p,  XL,  ly,  XLI,  18,  23,  32,  33,  35,  XLVIII,  11,  13,  ly,  22) 

Thanks  to  their  substantial  construction,  most  of  the  jar-covers  of  the  Jhukar  Period 
have  been  found  in  more  or  less  perfect  condition,  with  the  exception  of  one  type  which 
was  hand-made  and  indifferently  baked.  The  covers  are  occasionally  painted  or  incised  with 
patterns,  and,  though  one  or  two  examples  resemble  some  of  Harappa  w'ork,  the  majority 
are  quite  different  from  those  made  in  the  earlier  period. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Sitrv.  hid..  No.  43.  pis.  VIII,  XVI,  XXX. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XVl,  17-19. 

Spouted  vessels  are  practically  unknown  at  Mohenjo-daro,  only  one  example  being  recorded 
from  that  site:  M.  I.  C.,  p.  228.  Fragments  of  such  vessels  have  been  found  at  Jhangar,  but  the  forms 
of  these  differ  from  the  Jhukar  specimens.  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXXI,  6,  1 1 . 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CUETURE 


113 

No.  9 in  Pl.XXXLX,  which  appears  in  line  in  Pl.XEI,  35,  measures  2.4  inches  in 
diameter  and  is  roughly  decorated  with  concentric  lines  in  purplish-hrown  paint  on  a pink- 
coloured  slip.  These  lines  are  too  faint  to  photograph.  A rough  hole  pierces  the  handle  of 
this  cover,  and  a number  of  small  holes,  averaging  0.09  inch  in  diameter  are  arranged  round 
the  circumference.  These  were  possibly  provided  for  ventilation  purposes  like  the  notches 
round  the  edge  of  a cover  of  the  Harappa  Period  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXIX,  57. 

The  shape  of  the  cover  in  PI.  XE,  1 7 is  not  unlike  that  of  the  Harappa  specimens  shown 
in  PI.  XXVI,  12-34,  but  it  differs  in  having  an  incised  line  on  top  of  the  rim  and  wavy 
crossed  lines  on  the  handle  like  those  on  the  knob  in  PI.  XLVIII,  13.  This  cover  bears  a 
cream  slip  and,  though  well  finished  on  the  inside,  has  a rough  and  dragged  exterior  surface. 

Nos.  1 8,  23,  32,  33  in  Pi.  XLI  are  simple,  flat  lids  with  broad  strap-like  handles.  No.  33 
is  of  drab  ware,  the  remainder  are  of  ordinary  pottery.  All  are  hand-made,  badly  baked 
and  of  rough  workmanship.  No.  1 8 has  marks  of  burning  on  its  base  as  if  it  had  been  used 
to  stop  a flue.  In  spite  of  their  home-made  appearance  these  covers,  excluding  No.  23,  are 
eoated  with  cream-coloured  slips. 

The  four  incised  objects  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  1 1 , 13,  1 7,  22  are  the  tops  of  knob  handles  that 
once  belonged  to  large  covers.  No.  22  is  the  best  preserved  of  the  four  and  is  attached  to 
what  remains  of  a flat,  round  base  like  those  in  PI.  XLI,  15,  23,  which  they  closely  resemble 
except  in  the  shape  of  their  handles.  They  are  all  wheel-made  and  quite  unlike  covers  that 
were  used  by  the  Harappa  people. 

Jar-stand  (Pi.  XL,  30) 

This  is  the  only  jar-stand  of  Jhukar  make  so  far  discovered  and  is  a particularly  large 
one,  measuring  17.7  inches  in  diameter.  It  is  without  a slip  and  around  the  top  of  the 
upper  edge  run  a series  of  continuous  wavy  lines  scratched  with  a comb  or  notched  flint. 
Vertical  lines  of  the  same  description  are  arranged  in  groups  on  the  inside  with  intervals 
of  about  4.7  inches  between  them.  Possibly  the  interior  incised  lines,  which  would  in  the 
ordinary  way  be  hidden  by  a jar,  were  provided  to  prevent  the  latter  from  shifting  about 
on  the  stand. 

Handled  Vessels  (Pis.  XXXIX,  11,12,  XL,  23,  XLVIII,  2) 

Handles  only  occur  on  hand-made  vessels.  No.  1 1 in  Pi.  XXXIX,  which  appears  in 
line  in  Pi.  XL,  23,  has  a flat  base  and  vertical  walls,  from  which  protrude  two  roughly 
formed,  pointed  lugs  on  opposite  sides  of  the  vessel.  No.  1 2 in  the  same  plate  is  a fragment 
of  a howl  2.1  inches  high.  A thick,  flat  handle  projects  from  the  side  and  probably  a second 
was  once  opposite  to  it.  The  surface  of  this  particular  piece  is  very  rough  and  retains  traces 
of  a cream-coloured  slip.  The  curious  fragment,  also  of  a bowl,  shown  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  2 is 
2.7  inches  high  and  bears  a vertical  lug  which  is  slightly  different  in  shape  to  the  other 
examples  mentioned. 

All  the  above  handles  are  unpierced  and  were  used  to  lift  or  support  the  vessels  on 
which  they  were  found,  and  which,  likely  enough,  were  used  for  cooking  purposes. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


114 

Lamp  (PI.  XXXIX,  14) 

This  specimen  is  1.8  inches  high  and  roughly  made  of  a drab  coloured  clay.  It  seems 
to  be  a model  made  by  a child,  for  the  spout  to  hold  the  wick  is  set  much  too  low  for  any 
but  the  minimum  of  oil  to  be  contained  in  the  vessel.  No  lamps  of  this  type  are  known  either 
at  Chanhu-daro  or  Alohenjo-daro  in  the  Harappa  Period. 

Storage  Vessels  (Pis.  XXVI,  73,  XLl,  1, 7, 8, 42, 49, 50,  XLVll,  34,  35) 

Alany  fragments  of  storage  jars  were  found  scattered  about  the  summit  of  Alound  II 
and  in  the  debris  round  its  base.  Few  perfect  examples  were  unearthed,  hut  even  so  there 
was  quite  enough  evidence  to  show  that  both  in  shape  and  style  of  decoration  they  differ 
radically  from  the  jars  used  in  the  preceding  period. 

Nos.  I,  7-9  in  Pi.  XLI  show  the  contours  of  the  rims  and  shoulders  of  four  such  jars; 
the  painted  face  of  No.  i appears  in  Pi.  XLIII,  12.  No.  42  in  PI.  XLI  is  a fine  specimen, 
decorated  in  unusually  simple  manner  with  two  bands  of  light  red  edged  with  purple  with  a 
thick  purple  line  below.  The  narrow  neck  of  this  jar  suggests  that  it  had  been  used  for 
water  or  some  other  liquid. 

No.  49  in  PI.  XLI  is  also  illustrated  in  PI.  XLVII,  34  where  its  appearance  when  found 
and  its  type  of  decoration  are  shown.  Four  broad  red  bands  divide  this  vessel  into  three 
registers  and  these  are  filled  in  with  various  motifs  painted  in  purple.  The  ground  is  a 
yellow  slip  inclining  to  pink  in  places. 

The  large  round  pan  in  PI.  XLI,  50  is  shown  in  its  original  position  in  PI.  XLVII,  35, 
but,  unfortunately,  the  designs  it  bore  were  so  obscured  by  lime  deposits  that  they  could 
not  be  copied  in  the  field.  Two  wide  bands  of  red,  edged  thickly  with  purple,  decorate  this 
curious  vessel,  and  between  the  bands  a pattern  of  hatched  triangles  can  just  be  made  out. 
A reddish-purple  band  on  the  top  edge  of  this  pan  extends  down  inside  for  some  distance 
and  a ledge  round  it  once  accommodated  a close  fitting  cover.®^  This  particular  type  of  pan 
was  probably  expressly  made  to  hold  bread  or  flour. 

Some  of  the  larger  Jhukar  vessels  have  a slight  ribbing  between  the  neck  and  shoulder  as 
will  be  seen,  for  instance,  in  Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  7,  XLI,  i,  8,  XLVI,  20,  44,  XLVII,  4,  32, 
XLVIII,  16,  24.^^  The  large  incised  fragment  in  Pi.  XLVIII,  25  has  two  ribs  instead  of  the 
usual  one.  This  feature  appears  on  but  one  storage  jar  of  the  Harappa  Period  (Pi.  XXIV,  5), 
but  this  is  an  unique  specimen  with  several  ribs  that  were  obviously  applied  for  strengthen- 
ing purposes.  The  ribs  on  the  Jhukar  jars  are,  on  the  contrary^  intended  merely  for 
ornament;  they  are  not  prominent  and  are  situated  where  they  would  afford  but  little 
protection  to  the  vessel. 

The  small  storage  jar  in  PI.  XXVI,  73  has  been  erroneously  inserted  there.  It  is  of 
Jhukar  manufacture,  is  undecorated,  and  coated  with  a cream-coloured  slip. 

Glohnlar  Vessels  (Pis.  XXXIX,  15,  XLI,  29, 36, 41  j 

No.  1 5 in  PI.  XXXIX  bears  a pattern  of  oblique  and  horizontal  lines  in  light  red  set 

Compare  this  pan  with  one  of  earlier  date  in  PI.  XXIX,  37. 

This  ribbing  is  also  present  on  the  sherds  shown  in  Pis.  XLIII,  3, 12,  XLV,  24. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


115 

between  groups  of  vertical  lines  in  black  on  a cream-coloured  slip.  Broad  red  bands  border 
this  ornamental  strip,  while  the  loops  and  lines  below  are  in  black.  The  rim  and  neck  are 
coloured  a purplish-black,  which  has  trickled  down  a little  way  inside.  Unfortunately,  the 
base  of  this  interesting  jar  is  missing  but  it  would  appear  to  have  been  rounded. 

The  vessel  in  Pi.  XLI,  29  is  coated  with  a light  red  slip  on  which  a simple  pattern  of 
vertical  and  horizontal  markings  in  black  has  been  drawn.  The  lower  portion  of  this  jar 
has  no  slip,  the  junction  between  the  red  and  natural  surface  of  the  pottery  being  v'ery 
irregular. 

The  neck  and  rim  of  No.  36  in  the  same  plate  has  been  washed  over  with  red,  the 
rest  being  coloured  cream.  Three  black  spots  of  irregular  size,  placed  on  only  one  side  of  this 
vessel,  may  be  identification  marks.  The  same  grouping  of  spots  occurs  on  the  vessel 
illustrated  in  colour  in  No.  2 of  Frontispiece  (b),  but  in  this  case  they  are  repeated  four 
times  at  equal  distances  round  the  body  of  the  jar. 

No.  41  in  Pi.  XLI  is  well  made  and  thin  for  its  size.  Its  sole  decoration  consists  of 
thin  purple  lines  painted  in  groups  of  three  on  a smooth,  dark  red  slip. 

Jars  with  Low-centered  Bodies  (Pis.  XXVIII,  ^4,  XLI,  28,  ^4^  40, 46-48) 

The  little  jar  in  PI.  XLI,  28  has  lost  its  rim,  which  was  possibly  flared.  It  is  well  made 
and  covered  with  a thick  red  slip,  as  far  down  as  its  greatest  girth,  which  has  dripped  in 
places  on  to  its  cream  coloured  lower  portion.  No.  34  in  the  same  plate  is  of  the  same  type 
and,  except  for  the  fact  that  it  has  no  slip  at  all  below  its  carination,  is  similarly  coloured. 
A light  red  coating  showing  signs  of  polish  covers  the  whole  of  No.  40;  its  neck  and  rim  are 
missing,  and  its  base  has  been  trimmed  with  some  sharp  instrument. 

The  rather  rough  surface  of  No.  46  bears  a red  slip,  while  No.  47,  which  is  markedly 
striated  inside  and  out,  is  coloured  cream.  The  portion  below  the  angle  of  the  base  of  the 
coarsely  finished  No.  48  is  particularly  thick,  with  a surface  that  looks  as  if  it  had  been  pared 
when  its  clay  was  very  dry.  This  part  of  the  jar  has  a cream  wash,  the  remainder  being 
painted  red. 

The  jar  illustrated  in  PI.  XXVIII,  34  has  been  inadvertently  included  with  some 
Harappa  potter)^  It  has  no  slip  or  decoration  and  was  found,  together  with  its  little  hand- 
made companion,  at  the  high  level  of  + 17.5  feet. 

Round-hased  Jar  (Pi.  XLI,  37) 

This  particular  jar  was  found  in  many  pieces  and  it  was  just  possible  to  restore  it.  It 
has  an  almost  rounded  base  and  must  therefore  have  been  kept  on  a stand  or  on  loose  soil. 
Moderately  baked,  it  is  thin  for  its  size  and  its  slipless  body  is  rough  in  texture  and  bears 
straw-markings. 

Ordinary  Bowls  and  Dishes{Pls.  XXXIX,  1 3,  XL,  14-16,  18,21,  22,  24,  25,  27-29,  32,  XLI,  39) 

The  rough-looking  bowl  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  13  (see  also  PI.  XL,  18)  is  hand-made  and 
much  blackened  by  smoke.  It  is  encrusted  with  a grey  substance  which  may  be  the  remains 
of  food.  No.  14  in  PI.  XL  is  a well  made  specimen,  part  of  which  has  been  roughly  trimmed 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


1 16 

on  the  outside.  It  contained  a thick  grey  deposit  when  found  and  this,  coupled  with  the 
shape  of  the  vessel  and  the  fact  that  it  is  without  a slip,  suggests  that  it  had  been  used  for 
cooking.  Nos.  1 5 and  1 6 are  two  small  hand-made  bowls,  both  of  a drab  paste  and  obviously 
manufactured  at  home. 

The  striated,  coarse-looking  bowl  in  Pi.  XL,  21  has  a smooth  interior.  It  is  a badly 
baked  specimen,  drab  in  colour,  whose  paste  is  plentifully  mixed  with  sand  and  mica. 
No.  22  is  coated  all  over  with  a light  red  wash  and  is  roughly  decorated,  both  inside  and  out, 
with  irregular  lines  of  a purple  hue.  The  deep,  hand-made  vessel  No.  24  is  small  in  size  and 
made  of  a drab-coloured  paste  without  a slip.  The  same  applies  to  No.  25. 

No.  28  is  ornamented  on  the  outside  only  with  bands  of  purplish-black  applied  on  a 
pink  slip.  The  small  bowl  No.  29  has  cord  markings  on  its  wide  base  and  is  of  rough  work, 
with  marks  of  secondary'  burning  here  and  there.  No.  32  is  hand-made  and  of  rough 
workmanship. 

The  curious  specimen  illustrated  in  PI.  XLI,  39  is  coloured  red  as  far  down  as  its  carina- 
tion;  below,  the  surface  is  left  bare.  It  is  an  interesting  type  and  one  regrets  the  missing  rim. 

Clips  (Pis.  XLI,  30,  31,43) 

No.  30  is  an  unusually  thick  and  heavy  cup  coated  with  a cream-coloured  slip.  The 
clay  of  No.  3 1 contains  a large  proportion  of  lime  particles  and  mica.  It  has  no  slip  and  its 
base  is  heavily  scored  by  the  cord  used  to  remove  it  from  the  wheel.  No.  43  is  not  only 
inadequately  fired  but  is  of  the  roughest  workmanship. 

Designs  and  Patterns 

A brief  description  will  now  be  given  of  the  designs  and  patterns  appearing  on  the 
Jhukar  pottery.  It  has  already  been  explained  that  the  broad  red  bands  that  divide  so  many 
examples  of  this  painted  pottery  into  horizontal  registers,  in  combination  with  the  blacks, 
purples,  or  browns  used  for  the  motifs  and  patterns,  place  this  pottery  in  the  category  of 
bi-chrome,  if  the  colours  of  the  slips  are  not  also  taken  into  account.  Sometimes  a red  of  a 
slightly  different  tint  from  that  of  the  bands,  is  employed  in  the  decoration  of  a jar  (Pis. 
X}^IX,  15,  XLII,  6,  8,  9,  1 1-17,  19,  XLV,  this  colour  being  denoted  in  the  line 

drawings  by  stippling. 

Red  Bands.  The  bands  that  render  this  Jhukar  pottery  so  distinctive  vary  in  width 
from  0.75  to  sometimes  as  much  as  2.5  inches.  They  are  nearly  always  edged  with  a black 
or  purple  line,  probably  for  the  reason  that  the  red  was  applied  with  a very  coarse  brush 
or  mop  and  it  was  necessary  to  hide  its  uneven  margins. 

The  number  of  bands  vary.  Large  vessels  such  as  the  storage  pieces  in  Pi.  XLI,  42,  50 
have  only  two.  Lour  appear  on  the  large  jar  in  Pi.  XLVII,  34  and  three  are  sometimes  used  on 
the  smaller  wares  (Frontispiece  (b),  4,  8).  They  serve  also  to  decorate  the  interiors  of  most 
of  the  dishes  of  food-stands,  singly  as  in  Pi.  XLV,  25,  37  and  repeated  as  in  Pis.  XLVI,  42, 
45,  XLVII,  19,  etc.  One  band  generally  decorates  the  outside  of  such  dishes  and  the  same 

Some  of  these  examples  are  again  illustrated  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (b). 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE  117 

kind  of  ornamentation  is  present  on  the  bases  of  the  stands  as,  for  example,  in  Pi.  XLI, 
13,  19,20,  24,25. 

These  broad  red  bands  are  in  most  cases  plain;  that  they  were  sometimes  ornamented 
is  shown  by  the  two  food-stand  dishes  in  Pis.  XLIV,  12,  XLVI,8.  Occasionally  a line  of 
loops  or  other  kind  of  pattern  has  trespassed  upon  them  because  of  careless  or  hurried  work. 

Coloured  bands  as  a potter)^  decoration  came  first  into  use  in  India  in  the  Amri  Period,®® 
a culture  that  preceded  the  Harappa  civilization.  As  we  have  already  seen,  this  form  of 
ornamentation  was  never  used  by  the  Harappa  people,  but  it  appears  again  on  the  Jhukar 
pottery.  Later  on.  as  we  shall  presently  see,  these  red  bands  re-occur  on  the  Trihni  and  still 
later  Aluhammadan  wares  (Pi.  XL,  1,2);  they  even  persist  down  to  the  present  day  in  Sindh. 

Similar  red  bands  are  a feature  of  some  of  the  Jemdet  Nasr  wares  in  Sumer  and 
are  especially  prominent  on  some  pieces  of  pottery  from  Tepe  All  Abad  in  Persia.  ' It  is, 
however,  on  the  wares  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Tell  Halaf  Period  that  they  are  most 
conspicuous,  a fact  which  provides  another  instance  of  the  apparent  close  relationship 
existing  between  this  North  Assyrian  and  Jhukar  pottery,  notwithstanding  the  great  interval 
of  time  that  separated  these  two  cultures.®®  To  this  and  other  points  of  resemblance  I shall 
allude  later. 

Animal  Motifs.  Animal  figures  have  been  found  on  only  two  pieces  of  Jhukar  pottery, 
in  contrast  to  the  earlier Jftarappa  material,  on  which,  as  we  have  seen,  animal  and  more 
particularly  bird  motifs  are  extremely  common. 

The  sherd  in  Pi.  )(LV,  2 1 bears  the  fig  ure  of  a running  ibex.  This  fragment,  part  of  a 
large  storage  jar,  is  coated  with  a cream  slip,  upon  which  the  scene  is  painted  in  purple. 
The  only  other  representation  that  I know  of  this  animal  in  a running  attitude  occurs  on  a 
sherd  from  Periano-Ghundai  in  Northern  Baluchistan.  This  last  example,  together  with 
other  pieces  of  pottery  associated  with  it,  can  be  regarded  as  being  either  of,  or  closely 
related  to,  Jhukar  work.®® 

The  same  species  of  goat  will  be  seen  on  the  broken  dish  in  Pi.  XLV,  22.  This 
silhouette  is  very  carefully  drawn  in  a purplish-black  paint  on  a light  red  ground.  The 
angle  of  its  body  indicates  that  the  missing  forelegs  were  resting  upon  the  plant  device  in 
front  of  it,  quite  in  the  Sumerian  manner.  This  particular  plant  motif,  as  we  shall  later 
see,  forms  a common  repetition  motif  on  much  of  the  Jhukar  pottery. 

Plant-forms.  One  of  the  chief  differences  between  the  painted  wares  of  the  Jhukar 
and  Harappa  Periods  is  to  be  found  in  the  manner  in  which  plant  forms  are  depicted.  With 
two  possible  exceptions  (Pi.  XLV,  19,42)  the  Jhukar  artist  is  content  to  portray  his  floral 

Named  after  the  site  where  this  verj'  distinctive  pottery  was  first  found;  cf.  Majumdar,  Explora- 
tions in  Sind,  pp.  24-33. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  VIII,  pi.  VII. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  “ Excavations  at  Tall  Chagar  Bazar,”  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  pi.  II,  4-6.  Mallowan 
suggests  also  a possible  relationship  between  the  Tall  Halaf  and  Jemdet  Nasr  wares,  for  which  see 
Prehistoric  Assyria,  p.  177. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  37,  pp.  35,  36;  pi.  V (P.  36). 

f 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


ii8 

devices  in  a conventional  manner;  indeed,  motifs  of  this  description  are  frequently  so 
geometric  that  their  origins  are  scarcelv  apparent  at  all.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the 
Harappa  jar-painter  showed  considerable  enterprise  in  his  plant  arrangements  on  a jar, 
but  at  the  same  time  never  lost  sight  of  the  identity  of  the  plant  on  which  he  based  his 
theme.  One  has  only  to  compare  the  Harappa  work  illustrated  in  Pis.  XXXIV,  i , XXXVI,  7, 
9,  28,  37,  etc.,  with  the  Jhuhar  designs  in  Pis.  XLV,  20,  24,  32,  XLVI,  32,  etc.,  to  see  the 
dissimilarity  of  the  ceramic  art  of  the  two  periods. 

The  pipal  tree,  which  appears  so  frequently  on  the  Harappa  wares,  finds  no  place 
at  all  on  the  Jhukar  pottery,  and  the  acacia,  with  its  long  thin  leaves  (Pi.  XXXVII,  17,  19), 
is  also  absent.  The  most  favoured  motif  employed  by  the  Jhukar  artist  was  a highly 
conventionalized  plant  motif,  possibly  derived  from  the  lotus,'‘°  and  was  made  to  serene  either 
as  a continuous  pattern  round  a jar  or  dish  (Pis.  XLIII,  7,  ro,  12,  XLIV,  13,  XLVII,  6,  etc.) 
or  to  alternate  with  other  patterns,  as  for  example  in  Pis.  XLII,  3,  10,  XLVI,  27,  etc.  The 
clever  and  economical  way  in  which  this  form  of  frieze  is  arranged,  so  as  to  enable  each 
portion  to  form  an  integral  part  of  a continuous  pattern,  indicates  that  the  artist  knew 
something  of  the  principles  of  design.^' 

The  next  most  popular  design  was  a leaf  or  bud  form  with  a long  curv'ed  stem  generally 
arranged  in  parallel  rows  (Frontispiece  (b),  7,  Pis.  XLII,  10,  XLIII,  i,  XLIV,  7,  XLV,  24,  32, 
XLVI,  32,  XLVII,  I,  2,  4,  15).  The  peculiar  filaments  that  are  sometimes  associated  with 
this  last  form  of  decoration  (Pis.  XLIII,  i,  XLV,  32,  XLVII,  1,  etc.)  suggest  a water  plant 
and  bring  to  mind  the  curious  root-like  processes  that  sometimes  appear  on  the  Harappa 
pottery.'*^  This  leaf  and  stem  motif  forms,  in  combination  with  other  devices,  wide  borders 
round  the  larger  jars. 

Both  the  sherds  shown  in  Pi.  XLV,  19,42  once  belonged  to  tall  vessels  of  the  storage 
type.  The  plants  depicted  on  them  cannot  at  present  be  identified,  but  it  appears  that  an 
attempt  was  made  in  both  cases  to  break  away  from  convention  and  portray  the  natural 
form.  Both  motifs  are  painted  in  purple,  the  first  on  a cream  and  the  second  on  a pink- 
coloured  slip,  while  No.  42  also  bears  the  red  band  characteristic  of  the  Jhukar  Period.*’ 
V\Tat  appears  to  be  the  same  species  of  plant  is  pictured  on  early  sherds  from  Tepe  Giyan 
and  Tepe  Sialk  in  North-western  Persia.** 

The  sherd  illustrated  in  Pi.  XLV,  20,  and  again  in  colour  in  Frontispiece  (b),  10,  bears 
a verj"  conventional  tree  form  which  was,  no  doubt,  repeated  at  intervals  round  the  jar. 

The  lotus  does  not  appear  on  the  Harappa  pottery,  though  its  seed-vessels  were  sometimes 
copied  in  faience  to  serve  as  pin-heads:  M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CLVIII,  4,  6.  It  grows  in  many  parts  of  Sindh, 
especially  in  the  hlanchhar  Lake. 

“ This  same  motif  appears  on  certain  vessels  from  Baluchistan,  all  of  which  appear  to  be  of 
Jhukar  make:  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  Vol.  37,  pis.  VI  (p.  48),  VII  (P.  SW.  4),  VIII  (P.  SW.  4}, 
XI  (M.M.E.  15). 

As  seen  in  Pis.  XXXI,  23,  XXXVI,  41. 

The  level  and  locus  of  No.  19  in  Pi.  XLV  cannot  be  given  in  the  catalogue  at  the  end  of  this 
book,  because  its  original  label  was  eaten  by  w'hite  ants. 

Contenau  et  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  du  Tepe-Giyan,  pi.  60;  Ghirshman,  Foiiilles  de  Sialk,  Vol.  I, 
pis.  LXII,  LXIIL  LXV,  LXVI. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


119 

This  tree  and  other  designs  associated  with  it  are  painted  in  red  and  brown  on  a cream- 
coloured  slip,  the  effect  produced  being  a very  striking  one. 

Ball  and  Stem  Motif.  This  motif,  peculiar  to  the  Jhukar  Period  (PI.  XLV,  25,  28,  30, 
31,35,  37),  may  be  intended  to  represent  a bud  or  seed-v^essel  with  a long  stem,  the  latter 
being  always  gracefully  curved  and  the  former  carefully  hatched.  Up  to  the  present,  this 
device  has  been  found  only  on  the  dishes  of  food-stands,  where  it  usually  appears  in  black 
or  purple  on  a cream-coloured  ground.  On  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XLV,  3 1 , however,  it  is  set  on  a 
light  red  slip  and  forms  a continuous  and  compact  pattern  round  the  interior  of  this  dish. 
With  the  single  exception  of  a sherd  from  Jai-damh  in  Southern  Baluchistan,  the  employ- 
ment of  this  particular  device  is  unknown  to  me  on  potter)^  from  sites  outside  India. A 
variation  of  it,  however,  has  been  adapted  to  form  part  of  a solar  symbol  on  a Cretan  seal.*® 

Chevron  Patterns.  This  simple,  yet  effective,  decoration  is  used  on  all  classes  of 
vessels,  though  somewhat  rarely  on  the  dishes  of  food-stands  (Pis.  Frontispiece  (b),  i,  3,  5, 
6,  7,  9,  XLII,  4,  II,  12,  15-18,  XLVII,  13,  17-19,  24,  27,  33).  Examples  of  it  painted  in 
monochrome  are,  however,  distinctly  rare.  In  the  case  of  Nos.  4 (see  also  Frontispiece  (b), 
5,  6)  and  18  in  Pi.  XEII  the  design  is  painted  in  black,  the  slip  being  in  the  first  specimen 
red  and  in  the  second  cream-coloured.  In  PI.  XLVII,  33  the  motif  is  executed  in  red  on  a 
cream  slip.  In  most  cases  this  chevron  pattern  is  in  two  colours,  red  and  black,  so  arranged 
that  the  down  strokes  are  of  one  colour  and  the  up  of  the  other  (Pis.  XLII,  1 1-13,  15,  17, 
XLVII,  13,  17-19,  24).  The  sherd  in  Pis.  XLII,  4,  ii,  15-18,  XLVII,  13,  17,  24  show  this 
pattern  enclosed  in  compartments  separated  by  groups  of  vertical  lines  or  other  arrangements; 
in  some  cases  it  forms  an  unbroken  border  round  a jar  or  dish  (Pis.  XLII,  1 2,  XLVII,  1 9,  23). 

Chevron  patterns  were  very  rare  at  Mohenjo-daro,  their  colouring  being  in  every  case 
black.*^  It  was  not  a common  motif  on  the  pottery  of  Sumer  and  Elam,  except  in  the 
Jemdet  Nasr  Period,  where  the  up  and  down  strokes  are  always  of  the  same  colour  and 
frequently  separated  by  a vertical  line.*®  A device  appearing  on  the  very  early  Tall  Halaf 
wares  of  North  Assyria  resembles  the  Jhukar  type  of  chevron  most  closely,  the  method  of 
using  two  colours  for  the  alternate  markings  being  the  same  in  both  cases.*®  A sherd  from 
the  Zayak  valley  in  Southern  Baluchistan  also  bears  a chevron  pattern  painted  in  black 
and  red,  but  this  differs  slightly  from  the  Jhukar  examples  both  in  the  placing  of  these 
two  colours  and  in  the  arrangement  of  the  motif.®”  There  seems  no  doubt  that  these 
chevron  patterns  were  originally  derived  from  basketry. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Sure.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pi.  Ill  (J.  D.  2).  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  what 
relationship  this  sherd  bears  to  Jhukar  pottery  without  handling  it. 

Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  II,  p.  218,  fig.  123(a). 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXX,  15. 

Frankfort,  Oriental  Institute  Communications,  No.  20,  pi.  VI. 

^®Von  Oppenheim,  Tell  Halaf,  pis.  1, 6,  LII,  5,  LIlI,  2.  Specimens  of  this  ware  found  at 
ArpaAiyah  also  bear  this  motif,  but  here  it  is  painted  in  monochrome  on  the  exterior  of  certain  bowls : 
Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  figs.  70  (5),  71  (3);  Mallowan,  “ Excavations  at  Tall  Chagar 
Bazar,”  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  fig.  24  (4). 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Sure.  Ind.,  No.  43,  p.  33,  pi.  I (Z.  N.  7). 


120 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Chequer  Patterns.  The  chequers  in  Pis.  XLII,  25,  XLIV,  i,  XL VI,  i,  2,  4, 6,  7,  27  are 
hatched  in  black  or  purplish  black  on  a red-coloured  slip.  In  Pi.  XLII,  20  the  ground  is 
cream-coloured  and  the  squares  hlled  in  with  red  and  outlined  with  the  same  colour  in  a 
darker  shade.  The  squares  in  PI.  XLVI,  5 are  alternately  brown  and  pink,  the  latter  being 
the  ground  colour.  A very  unusual  combination  occurs  on  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XLII,  19,  where 
the  colours  used  are  black  and  dark  red  on  a pink  coloured  slip.  The  chequers  in  this 
particular  example  and  also  those  in  No.  20  are  completely  hlled  in,  but  this  form  of 
treatment  is  rare,  the  usual  method  being  to  cross-hatch  them  and  thus  allow  the  colour  of 
the  ground  to  show  through.  The  lighter  squares  in  Pi.  XLVI,  i,  2,  6,  are  partly  hlled  in 
with  crossed  lines,  perhaps  to  render  them  less  obtrusive.  This  use  of  crossed  lines  in  this 
particular  form  of  pattern  is  also  to  be  found  on  some  of  the  Tell  Halaf  wares,  hut,  as  far 
as  can  be  ascertained,  on  no  other  pottery  than  the  Jhukar.®^  These  chequer  devices  are 
to  be  found  on  all  types  of  vessels,  but  are  used  chiefly  to  decorate  the  dishes  of  food-stands 
in  association  with  other  motifs. 

Rhombs.  Rhombs  are  used  on  the  Jhukar  pottery  to  hll  in  single  and  double  horizontal 
borders,  as  in  Pis.  XLIV,  3,  and  XLVI,  14,  15,  or  arranged  vertically  panel-wise,  as  in 
PI.  XXXIV,  24,  or  set  in  massed  groups  (Pis.  XLIV,  2,  XLVI,  8).  Except  in  the  two  last  cases 
the  rhombs  are  invariably  hatched.  The  curious  lines  projecting  from  the  top  and  bottom 
angles  of  the  rhombs  in  Pi.  XLVI,  14  are  also  to  be  seen  on  some  painted  wares  from 
Damin  and  Khurab  in  Persian  Baluchistan,  though  in  other  respects  these  have  nothing 
in  common  with  our  Jhukar  material. “ Rhombs,  similarly  furnished,  appear  on  some  vessels 
from  Samarra,®^  but  this  complex  form  does  not  appear  to  have  been  used  elsewhere. 

This  rhomb  device  is  associated  with  a plant  motif  in  PI.  XLIV,  13.  Here  the  central 
petal  of  the  lotus,  if  it  be  a lotus,  is  lozenge-shaped  instead  of  having  the  usual  bud-like  form. 

The  massed  rhomb  pattern  in  Pis.  XLIV,  2,  XLVI,  8 is  found  also  on  wares  from 
Jemdet  Nasr®‘  and  Nineveh.”  Used  in  several  lines  to  fill  in  horizontal  borders,  these 
rhombs  are  quite  frequently  used  on  the  Al-'Ubaid  ” and  Tell  Halaf  pottery;  ” on  the  last 
it  often  forms  the  sole  decoration  of  a bowl  or  jar. 

Rhombs  until  Incurved  Sides.  Pi.  XLVI,  12,  17.  This  type  of  rhomb  is  rare  and 
appears  only  on  two  Jhukar  sherds.  It  was  not  used  in  the  Harappa  Period.  It  occurs  on  a 
sherd  from  Sistan  ” and  on  another  from  Northern  Baluchistan.^"  The  Tell  Halaf  and 

Von  Oppenheim,  Tell  Halaf,  pi.  II,  2;  Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  figs.  32,  37,  78. 

Stein,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances,  pis.  XI  (A.  68),  XIII  (200),  XXXIII  (13). 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V,  pis.  XXXV,  221,  XXXVI,  234,  a,  239.  In  these  examples  the  couplings 
are  doubled. 

Anthropology  Memoirs,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  vol.  I,  pi.  LXVIII,  2. 

Thompson  and  Mallowan,  llliist.  Lon.  Nexus,  1931,  p.  ii2i  (9). 

Hall  and  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  I,  pi.  XVIlI  (1769). 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  figs.  71,  72;  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  fig.  22. 

Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine,  1925,  pi.  I,  fig.  26. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pi.  V (P.  2). 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


I2I 


Al-'Ubaid  wares  also  furnisli  examples,  though  here,  too,  the  form  is  as  scarce  as  the 
straight-sided  type  is  common. 

Spot  Decoration.  Large  spots,  sometimes  curiously  situated,  take  their  share  of  Jhukar 
decoration.  A very  unusual  example  is  illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIV,  22,  where  spots  are  used 
to  fill  in  the  spaces  of  a multiple  loop  pattern,  and  again  in  Pl.XLVI,  12,  17,  where  they 
serve  the  same  purpose  in  quite  a different  pattern.  The  jar  shown  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  i o and 
again  in  PI.  XLI,  38  is  decorated  with  large  purple  spots  set  between  loops  of  the  same 
colour,  the  combination  forming  a simple  and  yet  pleasing  pattern.**^  Another  unusual 
spot  device  is  depicted  on  the  large  sherd  in  Pi.  XLII,  6,  which  once  formed  part  of  a 
storage  jar.  Here  red  spots  are  placed  between  partitions  of  brown-coloured  paint.  In  Pi. 
XLII,  13  one  red  and  one  brown  spot  are  irregularly  set  in  a petal-shaped  motif  (shown 
more  clearly  in  Frontispiece  (b),  3).  No.  2 in  Frontispiece  (b),  is  a small  jar  ornamented 
on  all  four  sides  with  three  black  spots  in  a row.®'  A similar  three-spot  pattern  is  also 
present  on  the  vessel  shown  in  Pi.  XLI,  36,  but  there  it  is  probably  an  identification  mark 
as  it  is  not  repeated  elsewhere  on  the  jar. 

This  very  unusual  use  of  the  spot  device  has  few  parallels  elsewhere.  On  a sherd 
from  Southern  Baluchistan  a row  of  spots  is  painted  very  like  those  on  the  jar  in  PI.  XLI, 
36.®^  Spots  are  an  important  feature  in  the  decoration  of  the  Tell  Halaf  pottery,  as  well  as 
on  the  wares  of  the  Al-'Ubaid  Period  and  also  on  certain  Persian  fabrics.®'*  In  the  main, 
however,  the  spots  are  minute  in  size  and,  moreover,  distributed  over  considerable  areas. 

Spot  motifs  do  not  appear  exclusively  on  the  Jhukar  wares  from  Chanhu-daro;  they 
are  also  to  be  found  on  pottery  of  the  same  culture  from  other  parts  of  Sindh,®'  and  on  the 
later  Trihni  ware  (Pi.  XLV,  i,  4,  5,  13).  The  large  spots  used  on  the  Harappa  pottery, 
linked  together  by  lines  as  in  PI.  XXXVI,  29,  form  an  entirely  different  motif. 

Loops,  Single  and  Multiple.  Single  loops  are  used  either  for  a border  pattern,  as  in 
Pis.  XXXIX,  to,  15,  XLI,  38,  XLII,  22,  XLV,  39,  XLVII,  28,  or  to  break  a sudden  transition 
between  the  painted  and  unpainted  portions  of  a vessel  as  in  Pis.  XLII,  2,  XLIV,  13,  XLV, 
25,  XLVI,  14,  37,  41-43.  In  this  connection  the  loops  sometimes  stray  on  to  the  red  bands 
so  characteristic  of  the  Jhukar  pottery  (Pis.  XLV,  25,  XLVI,  37). 

An  exceptional  double  row  of  loops  appears  on  the  sherd  in  PI.  XLVI,  38,  the  arrange- 
ment forming  a perhaps  unintentional  scale  pattern.  Occasionally  the  loops  are  roughly 
hatched  as  will  be  seen  in  PI.  XLVII,  20,  21, 23,  29,  all  these  examples  being  fragments 
of  large  storage  jars.  No.  22  in  Pi.  XLVII,  which  is  part  of  the  rim  of  a food-stand  dish, 

Mallowan,  “Excavations  at  Tall  Chagar  Bazar,”  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  fig.  22(1);  Prehistoric  Assyria, 
pI.V(f),Fig.34(6). 

This  combination  of  the  spot  and  loop  occurs  also  at  Mohenjo-daro,  but  there  the  loops  are  in 
multiple  rows  and  form  a kind  of  scale-pattern:  M.  I.  C..  pi.  XCI.  32. 

Compare  this  jar  with  a second  from  Chanhu-daro:  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXI,  21. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Siirv.  hid.,  vol.  43,  pi.  X (Naz.  19). 

A single  row  of  large  spots  form  a continuous  border  round  the  neck  of  a jar  from  Tepe  Gawra: 
Speiser,  Excavations  at  Tepe  Gaivra,  pi.  LXVIII,  1 18. 

Alajumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pis.  XVI,  16,  19,  XXII,  17,  18. 


122 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


shows  a contracted  form  of  a multiple  loop  pattern,  which,  when  expanded,  is  the  most 
common  marginal  decoration  of  all  the  dishes  (Pis.  XXXIV,  22,  XLIII,  5-8,  etc.). 

Simple  loop  patterns  are  to  be  found  on  most  ancient  wares  and  were  especially  favored 
by  the  Tell  Halaf  people,  where  they  were  employed  to  fill  in  wide  and  sometimes  very 
monotonous  borders.*®  The  multiple  loop  variety,  however,  is  not  so  well  known;  it  is 
occasionally  found  on  vessels  of  the  Harappa  Period,  decorating  the  rims  of  certain  kohl-jars 
(Pi.  XXXIX,  19).  Double  and  triple  rows  of  loops  are  frequent  on  the  Susian  pottery,®^ 
and  multiple  rows  on  the  early  Samarra  wares,**  but  these  are  arranged  in  continuous  lines 
round  the  jars  and  not  grouped  concentric-wise  as  in  PI.  XXXIV,  22,  etc.  The  latter  must, 
therefore,  be  regarded  as  a characteristic  type  of  Jhukar  decoration. 

Crescent-sha'ped  Motifs.  This  conspicious  motif  (Pis.  XXXIV,  18,  XLIV,  4,  9-1 1,  14, 
XLVI,  29,  XLVII,  12,  16,  26)  is  most  frequently  found  on  the  dishes  of  food-stands  and  is 
sometimes  associated  with  the  lotus  pattern  (PI.  XLIV,  4,  10,  14),  to  which  reference  has 
already  been  made.  A curious  variation  of  it  appears  on  some  fragments  of  storage  jars  in 
Pis.  XXXIV,  18,  XLIV,  4,  where  it  resembles  somewhat  a jelly-fish  seen  in  profile. 

The  hatched  crescentic  markings  in  Pi.  XLVI,  29  may  be  part  of  a continuous  pattern. 
They  appear  to  bear  no  relation  to  the  crescents  described  above,  which  are  never  set  in  this 
vertical  position. 

Crescent  motifs  are  rarely  found  on  prehistoric  pottery.  A mark  of  this  shape  is  incised 
on  the  base  of  a bowl  of  the  Tell  Halaf  period  from  Arpachiyah,  but  this,  of  course,  was  not 
intended  to  be  an  ornament.*^  A group  of  five  crescents,  set  one  below  the  other,  is  painted 
on  a sherd  of  Al-'Ubaid  date  from  Ur,'“  and  two  examples  of  this  motif  appear  on  an  early 
painted  sherd  from  Zhob-Thal  in  Southern  Baluchistan, and  three  on  the  inside  of  a 
bowl  from  Nal.^^ 

It  is  difficult  to  say,  however,  whether  all  the  forms  mentioned  above  were  inspired 
by  the  moon;  indeed,  the  jar  painters  may  have  had  something  quite  different  in  mind. 
One  is  less  doubtful  with  regard  both  to  the  Arpachiyah  example  and  also  to  a row  of 
crescents  which  serve  as  a border  on  a sherd  from  Mohenjo-daro.^* 

Triangular  Patterns.  In  view  of  the  geometric  nature  of  the  designs  and  patterns  on 
the  Jhukar  pottery,  it  is  somewhat  surprising  to  find  that  the  simpler  triangular  motifs  were 
far  from  popular.  They  appear  on  two  sherds  only  (PI.  XLVI,  18,23).  In  the  first  two, 
triangles  are  linked  together  in  horizontal  and  vertical  positions  alternately,  and  in  the 
second  they  are  placed  in  a row  side  by  side.  Possibly  the  triangles  depicted  on  this  last 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  pi.  XXII,  3;  figs.  68-70,  etc. 

*’■  Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  VIII,  fig.  147;  t.  XIII,  fig.  9. 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V,  figs.  155,  161. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  69  (6). 

Hall  and  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  I,  pi.  XVII  (1536). 

Noetling,  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologic,  1898,  p.  467,  fig.  24. 

Hargreaves,  Nal  (_Mem.  Arch.  Stirv.  Ind.,  No.  35),  pi.  XVIII,  3. 

” M.  1.  C.,  pl.XC,  16. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CUETURE 


123 


sherd  were  joined  to  inverted  ones  above  them,  thus  forming  the  w'ell-hnown  double- 
triangle motif  that  appears  in  No.  18. 

This  double-triangle,  or  hour-glass  motif,  as  it  is  termed  by  some,  frequently  occurs  on 
ancient  pottery,  though  the  single  form  is  perhaps  more  common  still.  The  single  variety 
was  the  most  favoured  by  the  Harappa  people  at  Chanhu-daro;  at  Mohenjo-daro  the  exact 
opposite  was  the  case.’''* 

Joined  triangular  patterns,  somewhat  resembling  butterflies  in  shape,  are  illustrated 
in  Pis.  XEIV,  9,  XEVI,  7.  I do  not  suggest  that  there  is  an  attempt  here  to  represent  the 
actual  insect,  though  butterflies  actually  appear  on  some  Cretan  wares,  especially  in  the 
Early  Minoan  Period.''^  As  far  as  can  he  ascertained,  butterflies  have  not  been  identified 
on  any  other  pottery  of  this  or  earlier  date.™ 

On  our  Jhukar  pottery  the  triangle  is  sometimes  employed  to  compose  the  cross-like 
figures  that  ornament  the  centres  of  many  of  the  food-stand  dishes  (Pis.  XEIII,  7,  XEIV,  6, 
8,  XEVI,  19,  22,  39).  When  so  used  the  triangles  are  often  irregular  in  shape  and  have  one 
or  more  curv'ed  sides. 

Triangles  with  concave  sides  form  very  effective  borders  in  Pis.  XEIV,  12,  XEVI,  13, 
XEVII,  34  or  parts  of  a border  in  Pi.  XEVI,  16.  The  pattern  in  Pi.  XEVI,  13  is  almost  an 
exact  duplicate  of  one  on  an  early  sherd  from  Sistan.” 

Cruciform  Designs.  Cross-like  patterns  (Pis.  XEIII,  7,  XEIV,  6,  9,  XEVI,  19,  XEVII, 
3 1 ) are  frequent  but  appear  in  the  centres  of  dishes  only.  A six-armed  cross  w’ill  be  seen 
in  PI.  XEIV,  6,  and  a four-armed  one  in  Pi.  XEIV,  9,  the  voids  round  this  last  example  being 
filled  in  with  crescent-shaped  motifs.  Whether  this  association  of  the  cross  with  the  crescent 
has  any  significance  or  is  merely  accidental,  is  difficult  to  say.  Ancient  cross  patterns  are 
thought  by  some  to  represent  the  sun  and  it  is  therefore  not  impossible  that  this  particular 
device  on  this  Jhukar  fragment  is  an  attempt  to  combine  lunar  and  solar  emblems  in 
one  design.™ 

A motif  resembling  a Maltese  cross,  which  apparently  was  repeated  four  times,  appears 
on  the  dish  in  PI.  XEVI,  19,  and  a similar  cross  filled  the  centre  of  the  dish  in  PI.  XEIV,  8. 
This  type  of  cross  is  rarely  found  on  Mohenjo-daro  wares,™  but  exceptional  use  of  it  is 
to  be  seen  on  the  early  potter}'  of  Samarra,  where  it  is  usually  converted  by  the  addition  of 
animal  figures  and  the  like  into  elaborate  svastikas,  thus  emphasizing  its  solar  character.®" 

The  Maltese  cross  is  not  uncommon  on  early  potter}'  from  other  sites.  Its  first  appear- 
ance is  on  the  Tell  Halaf  pottery,®*  and  it  also  occurs  on  a very  early  sherd  of  the  Highland 

M.  1.  C.,  pis.  XCII,  10,  14-17;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVIII,  i. 

Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  vol.  I.  pp.  42,  75,  166. 

They  sometimes  appear  on  glazed  hippopotami  figures  of  the  Twelfth  Dynasty  of  Egypt  and 
also  on  tomb  walls,  but  never  on  the  pottery. 

Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine,  1925,  pi.  I,  44. 

Eor  another  combined  cross  and  crescent  device,  which  appears  on  a Late  Minoan  amphora,  see 
Rostovtzeff,  History  of  the  Ancient  World,  pi.  XXV,  fig.  4. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XVI,  7. 

Herzfeld,  Samarra  V,  figs.  23,  25-27,  30;  pi.  XII,  24. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  pis.  XVIII,  XXII,  10. 


124 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Culture  from  Persia.®'  It  adopts  several  forms  at  Susa  and  Musyan,®®  and  is  depicted  on 
two  sherds  of  Al-‘Ubaid  date  from  Ur.®*  Much  later  it  is  met  with  on  Kassite  seals  and 
again  on  a certain  type  of  pottery?  discovered  in  Palestine  and  believed  to  be  Cilician.®'' 

Nearer  India,  the  motif  is  found  on  early  wares  from  Southern  Persia®®  and  from 
Sistan,  where  it  is  as  elaborately  treated  as  it  is  in  Elam,®"  and  in  Baluchistan,  where  it 
is  very  prominent  on  a certain  type  of  vessel  from  Shahi-tump.®® 

The  Maltese  cross  appears  to  have  originated  in  North  Syria.  Thence  it  reached 
Mesopotamia  and  Persia  at  an  early  date  and  later  arrived  in  India,  by  way  of  Sistan  and 
Baluchistan.  Its  appearance,  first  in  the  Harappa  and  later  in  the  Jhukar  Period  has  been 
described,  but  it  was  never  really  popular  with  either  of  these  cultures  and  on  the  Jhukar 
pottery  takes  a form  which  differs  considerably  from  the  simpler  older  pattern. 

Other  cross  motifs,  such  as  the  Greek  and  St.  Andrew  types,  occur  fairly  frequently  on 
the  seals  and  amulets  of  the  Harappa  people.  The  former,  however,  is  never  used  on  the 
pottery  and  the  latter  only  occasionally.®® 

Bead  Motif.  In  Pi.  XXXII,  7 this  motif  is  shown  appropriately  ornamenting  the  neck 
of  one  of  the  Harappa  vessels,  but  only  two  examples  of  it  have  so  far  come  to  light 
on  the  Jhukar  pottery.  One  of  these  appears  in  Pi.  XLVII,  32,  the  other  is  to  be  seen  on  a 
sherd  found  by  Mr.  Majumdar  at  Lohumjo-daro.®® 

Excluding  the  rather  similar  rhomb  motif,  a true  bead  pattern  occurs  but  once  on  the 
Amri  pottery. “ The  Harappa  people,  who  were  particularly  fond  of  the  device,  do  not 
appear  then  to  have  borrowed  it  from  the  culture  immediately  preceding  their  own. 
Baluchistan  has  so  far  produced  only  two  examples  of  this  motif,®®  and  it  was  just  as  rarely 
used  in  Sistan.®®  Roughly  drawn  representations  are  to  be  seen  on  sherds  from  South- 
eastern Iran.®* 

This  bead  pattern  appears  most  frequently  on  the  Tell  Halaf  pottery  and  is  used  there 
in  rows  of  two  or  more  as  a border  pattern;  sometimes  it  is  the  only  motif  used  on  a dish 
or  bowl.®®  It  rarely  appears  on  Al-'Ubaid  wares  and  is  absent  on  the  Samarra  pottery  as 
well  as  being  strangely  scarce  elsewhere. 

Herzfeld,  lllnst.  Lon.  News,  1929,  p.  893,  fig.  ii. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  VIII,  figs.  175,  177;  t.  XVI,  figs.  4,  7. 

Hall  and  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  I,  pi.  XVI  (1650,  1652). 

Petrie,  Ancient  Gaza,  vol.  IV,  pi.  XXX,  figs.  23-26. 

Stein,  Iraq,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  pis.  XIX,  2,  XXI,  45,  XXII,  43,  etc. 

Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine,  1925,  pi.  I,  nos.  34-36,  38. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pis.  XV,  XVI. 

For  example  Pis.  XXIII,  6,  XXXIX,  23.  The  crossed  lines  on  the  exterior  of  the  dish  in  PI. 
XLVII,  31  cannot  be  regarded  as  a decorative  motif. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXII,  16. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  XXXIX,  to. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pi.  XXI  (S.  J.  23);  No.  43,  pi.  XII  (Sh.  T.  ii.  5). 

Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine,  1925,  pi.  I,  23,  pi.  II,  74. 

Stein,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances,  pis.  XIV  (Khur.  B.  ii.  204},  XVII  CB.  i.  1 19}. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  pis.  XIII,  XIV,  XXIII,  etc. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


125 


Criss-cross  Bands.  The  uninteresting  feature  of  cross-hatched  hands  as  a mode  of 
decoration  was  as  common  in  the  Jhuhar  as  it  w’as  in  the  Elarappa  Period.  Such  hands  are, 
however,  not  so  unsightly  if  the  hatching  is  oblique  as  in  PL  XLVI,  24,  30,  32.  When  the 
crossed  lines  are  vertical  and  horizontal  or  nearly  so,  the  effect  produced  is  far  from 
pleasing,  as  will  be  seen  in  Pis.  XLV,  39,  XLVI,  6,  10,  28,  XLVII,  28.  In  PI.  XLVI,  6 the 
margin  of  a dish  has  been  decorated  in  this  manner,  in  striking  contrast  to  the  more  lively 
patterns  generally  painted  on  this  part  of  a dish. 

Bands  and  borders  filled  in  w'ith  vertical  and  horizontal  hatching  are  commonly  found 
on  the  Tell  Halaf  wares, °°  the  more  attractive  oblique  hatching  being  comparatively  rare. 
The  exact  opposite  is  the  case  as  far  as  the  Al-'Ubaid  and  Samarra  wares  are  concerned.  On 
a sherd  from  Arpachiyah  oblique  and  horizontal  lines  are  used  together  with  fairly 
satisfactory  results.'’’ 

Oblique  hatching  was  alone  employed  to  fill  in  borders  on  the  Harappa  wares.  In 
some  cases  it  is  very  roughly  done  but  is  none  the  less  effectiv'e  on  this  account. 

Hide  Motif.  This  pattern,  so  common  on  the  Harappa  potter^^"®  appears  only  on  the 
Jhuhar  sherd  illustrated  in  Pi.  XLVI,  1 1,  where  it  encircles  the  neck  of  a storage  jar.  The 
same  device  occurs  on  an  Elamite  sherd,®'’  but  does  not  seem  to  have  been  employed 
elsewhere. 

Rosettes.  Four-petalled  rosettes,  so  popular  with  the  Harappa  people,  appear  much  less 
frequently  in  the  succeeding  Jhukar  Period.  On  the  sherd  in  PI.  XLVI,  3 this  motif  is  set  in 
compartments  and  probably  formed  a continuous  border  round  the  jar.  In  Pl.XLVIII,2i 
a rosette  is  deeply  incised  on  the  surface  of  a storage  vessel  fragment  and  was,  no  doubt, 
intended  as  an  identification  mark. 

Irregular  Lines  and  Markings.  Irregular  lines  and  markings  arranged  in  an  orderly 
manner  play  an  important  part  in  the  decoration  of  the  Jhukar  pottery.  Their  association 
with  carefully  drawn  patterns  of  various  kinds  (Pis.  XLII,  10,  XLIII,  10,  12,  etc.)  shows 
that  the  irreoularities  are  intentional  and  not  due  to  hurried  or  careless  work. 

O 

A favourite  arrangement  is  a group  of  notched  stripes  in  parallel  rows  which  alternates 
with  panels  composed  of  a number  of  vertical  lines  (Pis.  XLII,  2,  8,  9,  XLIII,  12,  XLV,  23, 
33,  34,  XLVI,  13)  or  with  some  other  form  of  decoration,  as  in  the  case  of  the  sherds  illus- 
trated in  Pis.  XLII,  3,  5,  7,  10,  13,  XLIII,  10,  XLV,  24,  26,  29,  41,  XLVII,  4,  9.  The  more 
abbreviated  markings,  especially  those  on  the  fragments  in  Pi.  XLV,  23,  29,  appear  at  first 
sight  rather  like  badly  drawn  figures  of  animals,  but  a comparison  between  them  and  other 
examples  shows  that  the  resemblance  is  accidental.  Some  of  the  lines  used  are  so  short  that 
they  might  almost  be  termed  spots,  but  even  then  they  have  a certain  decorative  value  as 
Frontispiece  (b),  4,  8,  Pis.  XLI,  29,  XLVI,  33,  34  will  show. 

Of.  cit.,  pis.  XIII,  XVIII,  XIX  (4),  XX;  figs.  55,  57. 

Of.  cit.,  fig.  33  (4). 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XCI,  1-6;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXVIII,  i;  see  also  PI.  XXXVII,  13  of  this  booh. 

°°  Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  XX,  p.  106. 


126 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


In  Pi.  XLII,  8,  9,  13,  17,  two  colours,  red  and  black,  are  used  to  accentuate  the 
markings,  as  will  be  more  clearly  seen  in  the  coloured  Frontispiece  (b),  1,3. 

The  metopic  arrangement  seen  in  Pi.  XLII,  1,2,  is  to  be  seen  on  one  sherd  of  the 
Harappa  Period,^”"  and  occurs  again  on  sherds  from  Baluchistan  and  Sistan;  the  relation- 
ship between  the  two  last  wares  and  the  Jhukar  pottery'  is,  as  yet,  uncertain. 

Roughly  painted  wavy  lines  in  single,  double,  or  even  triple  rows  often  encircle  a jar  or 
dish  (Pis.  XXXIV,  18,  19,  23,  XLVI,  36, 44).  It  will  be  noted  that  each  line  is  bordered  by  a 
straight  one. 

Vertical  lines  of  serpent  form,  painted  in  red  and  separated  from  each  other  by  black 
divisions,  provide  a unique  decoration  on  the  sherd  in  Pi.  XLII,  14. 

Rare  Motifs.  The  leaf-like  motif  appearing  on  the  large  fragment  of  a storage  jar  in 
PI.  XLV,  38  is  painted  in  thin  purple  on  a cream-coloured  slip.  It  seems  to  be  identical  with 
the  strange  motif  depicted  on  a large  jar  unearthed  at  Damb  Buthi  in  Sindh. Both  these 
motifs  should  be  compared  with  the  curious  objects  on  each  side  of  the  sherd  in  PI.  XLII,  14, 
but  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  they  are  intended  to  represent. 

The  border  pattern  on  the  three  fragments  illustrated  in  Pis.  XLII,  24,  26,  XLVI,  10 
do  not  appear,  as  far  as  I am  aware,  on  any  other  ancient  pottery'.  At  first  sight  it  would 
seem  that  these  three  sherds  come  from  one  vessel.  As  a matter  of  fact,  they  were  unearthed 
not  only  in  different  parts  of  Mound  II,  but  also  at  different  levels.  All  are  painted  in  black 
on  a polished  red  slip  and  were  originally  parts  of  large  dishes,  possibly  of  the  food-stand  type. 

The  sherd  in  Pi.  XLV,  39,  which  belonged  to  a large  jar  of  surprising  thinness,  bears  a 
figure-of-eight  motif  drawn  in  black  on  a smooth  red  slip.  In  shape  this  motif  closely 
resembles  a Minoan  shield,  or  one  of  the  queer  incised  clay  amulets  that  are  found  on  the 
site  of  Harappa  and  apparently  nowhere  else.'“^  A very  similar  device  is  seen  among  the 
pictographs  on  a seal  of  the  Harappa  Period  from  Chanhu-daro  and  here  its  resemblance  to 
a shield  is  very  marked. The  same  figure  is  quite  common  on  the  Late  Tell  Halaf  pottery, 
but  there,  as  Mr.  Mallowan  points  out,  it  is  undoubtedly  derived  from  the  conjoined 
hucrania  motif,  which,  at  the  end  of  its  development,  became  so  stylized  that  it  took  the 
form  of  a simple  eight-shaped  ornament.’"^ 

If  the  view  is  taken  that  this  particular  device  on  an  Indian  jar  is  taken  from  a shield, 
it  must  be  assumed  that  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  used  a guard  familiar  to  the 
Libyans,  the  Greeks,  the  Hittites,  the  Cretans,  and  the  Scythians.""®  This  would  imply 

""o  M.  L C.,  pi.  LXXXIX,  14. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pis.  VI  (P.57),  XI  (M.  M.  N.  10);  No.  43.  pis.  XXV 
(Nun.  12),  XXVII  (Nun.  Ill,  i),  XXIX  (Mehi,  111,4,3);  Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine,  1925, 
pi.  I,  I. 

Exflorations  in  Sind,  p.  115;  pi.  XXV,  34.  Mr.  Majumdar  found  this  jar  in  a burial  deposit, 
but  the  pottery  accompanying  it  seems  to  be  of  earlier  date  than  the  Jhukar  Period. 

Ann.  Re'p.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  1924-5,  pi.  XXVIII,  9. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XVII. 

Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  pp.  154-163,  figs.  74,  75. 

106  ppj  reasons  why  the  Minoan  and  probably  other  shields  were  eight-shaped,  see  J.  L.  Myres 
and  A.  E.  H.  Love,  Man,  1939,  sects.  37,  38. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


127 


connections,  or  relations,  with  the  Near  East,  but,  as  yet,  no  evidence  has  been  found  in 
India  to  support  such  a theory/” 

It  seems  unlikely,  therefore,  that  the  motif  on  this  particular  Jhukar  sherd  is  derived 
from  a shield.  Indeed,  it  is  so  like  the  abstract  forms  of  the  hitkraniiim  on  the  Tell  Halaf 
pottery  that  the  resemblance  can  hardly  be  an  accidental  one.  The  backgrounds,  too,  are 
strikingly  similar,  that  on  the  Jhukar  specimen  being  apparently  a copy  of  the  fine  stippled 
ground  so  popular  with  the  Tell  Halaf  and  Arpachiyah  potters. 

It  may  be  that  the  artist  who  decorated  this  Jhukar  vessel  had  no  idea  of  the  original 
meaning  of  this  motif.  It  most  probably  reached  him  through  very  devious  channels  from 
a remote  past  and  he  simply  adopted  it  to  suit  his  own  purpose.  His  setting  of  the  motif  in  a 
vertical  and  disconnected  position  is  different  from  the  Arpachiyah  arrangement,  which  is 
horizontal  and  forms  a chain-like  border  pattern. 

The  linked,  six-sided  pattern  in  Pi.  XLVII,  28  is  possibly  a variation  of  the  incur\^ed 
rhomb  pattern.  It  has  been  found  only  on  this  one  sherd— a fragment  of  a large  jar— and 
is  painted  in  purplish-black  on  a dark  red  slip.  The  motif  has  some  relation  to  a border 
pattern  that  is  often  seen  on  the  Tell  Halaf  wares,'"^  and  another  point  of  resemblance,  to 
which  attention  has  already  been  drawn,  is  the  curious  way  in  which  the  bands  on  either 
side  of  it  are  hatched.^” 

The  simple  method  of  dividing  a border  into  panels  by  the  use  of  groups  of  vertical 
lines  is  common  to  most  ancient  potter)',  but  the  pattern  used  to  fill  in  the  compartments 
on  the  jar  in  PI.  XXXIX,  1 5 is  unique.  Here  horizontal  lines  in  red  bridge  the  oblique 
black  lines  in  the  design;  the  effect,  despite  its  extreme  simplicity,  is  ver)’  pleasant. 

Groups  of  oblique  lines  in  reverse  directions  are  used  to  form  a running  border  in 
Pi.  XLII,  22.  The  resulting  pattern  is  unusual,  but  closer  inspection  will  show  that  it  is 
derived  from  a zig-zag  motif  with  the  upper  and  lower  portions  removed.  Although  it  only 
occurs  occasionally  on  the  Jhukar  potter)',  several  examples  of  it  have  been  found  on  sherds 
of  Al-‘Ubaid  date  from  Ur;  it  also  appears,  though  rarely,  on  certain  wares  from 
Baluchistan,  Sistan,  and  South-eastern  Persia.”® 

Comparisons  and  Relations 

Comparisons  between  the  Jhukar  and  Harappa  Wares.  The  differences,  between 
these  two  wares  considerably  outweigh  the  resemblances,  for,  as  already  stated,  there  is  a 

Bedrich  Hrozny  sees  many  resemblances  between  the  Harappa  and  Hittite  scripts:  O Nejstarsim 
Stchovdm  Ndrodu  A O Problemu  Civilisace  Proto-lndicke. 

IVIallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  76  (3-5).  It  should  be  noted  that  PL  XLV,  39  is 
the  only  example  of  a Jhukar  sherd  with  a ground  of  this  description. 

Oppenheim,  Tell  Halaf,  pis.  I,  6;  11,6;  Mallowan  and  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  fig.  54(4). 

Op.  cit,  fig.  55;  pis.  XIII,  XVII,  XX. 

Frontispiece  (b),  4-6,  8,  10;  pis.  XXXIX,  15,  XLI,  29,  XLII,  15,  21,  XLV,  23,  33,  XLVI, 
2.5-  33-  34-  40- 

Hall  and  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  vol.  I,  pi.  XIX  (2012,  2025,  2168). 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid.,  No.  43,  pi.  XXIV  (Baz.  8);  Andrews,  Burlington  Magazine, 
1925,  pi.  II,  85;  Stein,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances,  pi.  XX  (Kal.  i).  For  a similar  pattern  from 
Mohenjo-daro,  see  M.  I.  C.,  pi.  XCI,  17. 


128 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


marked  dissimilarity  between  the  fabrics,  the  style  of  decoration,  and  most  of  the  motifs  and 
patterns  used.  Yet  it  appears  possible  that  a certain  amount  of  borrowing  did  take  place. 
The  shape  of  the  Harappa  jar  in  PI.  XXVII,  68,  for  instance,  is  singularly  like  that  of  the 
Jhukar  vessel  in  PI.  XLI,  38,  though  each  is  ornamented  in  quite  a different  manner.  Again, 
the  careful  arrangement  for  a cover  to  fit  the  pan  in  Pi.  XXIX,  37  is  almost  exactly  dupli- 
cated on  the  Jhukar  vessel  in  PI.  XLI,  50. 

The  use  of  pedestal  dishes  by  the  people  of  both  cultures  implies  some  form  of  contact, 
for  this  type  of  vessel,  though  very  common  in  the  Harappa  Period,  is  not  known  in  the 
previous  Amri  Period.  Here  again,  the  Jhukar  examples  resemble  their  predecessors  in 
general  form,  although  the  manner  in  which  they  are  decorated  is  entirely  different. 

A certain  type  of  bowl-shaped  jar-cover  with  a knob  handle  inside  (Pi.  XXVI,  12-34) 
was  in  common  use  during  the  Harappa  Period,  and  a similar  specimen  illustrated  in 
PI.  XL,  17  is  of  Jhukar  work.  When  it  was  first  unearthed,  it  was  thought  to  be  of  earlier 
date,  but  subsequent  cleaning  revealed  incised  patterns  of  a type  never  found  on  vessels  of 
the  Harappa  Culture. 

The  use  of  red  polished  slips  is  another  link  between  the  two  periods,  though  the 
patterns  employed  are  entirely  different. 

Resemhlances  between  the  Jhukar  and  Amri  Wares.  In  the  use  of  red  bands  and 
geometric  style  of  decoration  the  Amri  pottery  has  much  more  in  common  with  the 
Jhukar  wares  than  with  those  of  the  Harappa  Culture  which  succeeded  it.  Other  points 
of  resemblance  are  to  be  found  in  the  popularity  of  the  rhomb,  four-petalled  rosette,  and 
loop  as  motifs.  As  regards  choice  of  colours,  apart  from  the  red  or  brown  bands  decorating 
the  Amri  pottery,  the  motifs  and  patterns  upon  it  are  always  painted  in  monochrome  on  a 
cream  or  pink-coloured  slip,“^  whereas  the  designs  on  the  Jhukar  vessels  are  most  frequently 
in  polychrome.  The  use  of  pink  slips  and  brown  paints  is,  however,  common  to  both 
periods,  but  the  Jhukar  forms  are  quite  different  from  those  of  the  older  culture. 

Evidences  of  the  Amri  Culture  first  came  to  light  at  the  site  from  which  it  takes  its 
name  and  Mr.  Majumdar,  who  was  the  first  to  identify  it,  claimed  that  it  must  antedate 
the  Harappa  civilization  as  all  his  finds  of  this  new  culture  lay  below  Harappa  material. 
Other  material  of  the  Amri  Culture  has  been  found  at  Tando  Rahim  Khan  and  Chauro 
Landi,  but  the  absence  of  remains  of  any  later  culture  on  these  two  Sindhi  sites  render  any 
exact  correlation  impossible. 

At  the  site  of  Ghazi  Shah  in  Sindh,  Amri  pottery’  overlapped  Harappa  wares  at 
certain  levels,^'  and  even  came  to  light  in  places  high  up  on  that  mound,  its  presence  being 
attributed  by  Air.  Alajumdar  to  building  activity  in  Islamic  times.^^®  In  any  case,  the  fact 
that  specimens  of  Amri  and  Harappa  wares  were  found  intermingled  at  Ghazi  Shah  is 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  26. 

Ihid. 

Op.  cit.,  pp.  86,  123. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  81. 

Op.  cit.,  p.  82. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


129 


particularly  interesting.  The  Harappa  people,  as  we  know,  were  a trading  rather  than  a 
war-like  race  and  it  seems  to  me  not  impossible  that  they  allowed  the  Amri  people  to  live 
unmolested  in  the  same  country  with  them,  though  borrowing  nothing  from  their  less 
important,  and  we  can  assume  less  civilized,  neighbours. 

The  resemblances  between  the  Jhukar  and  Harappa,  and  again  between  the  Jhukat 
and  Amri  wares  have  already  been  noted.  It  is,  however,  signihcant  that  no  relationship 
appears  to  exist  between  the  Harappa  and  Amri  wares.  The  ceramic  art  of  the  former  is 
certainly  intrusive  and  derives  nothing  from  that  of  any  earlier  Indian  culture. 

Comparisons  between  the  Jhukar  and  Tell  Halaf  Wares.  Certain  striking  analogies 
between  the  Jhukar  and  some  Tell  Halaf  pottery  have  already  been  mentioned  in  this 
chapter  but  they  can  usefully  be  recapitulated  in  this  survey.  They  are  as  follows: 

(a)  The  red  bands  dividing  some  vessels  of  both  cultures  into  horizontal  registers. 

(b)  Chequer  patterns  with  crossed  lines  used  to  hll  in  otherwise  blank  squares. 

(c)  Zig-zag  pattern  in  two  colours.^"" 

(d)  Rhomb  motifs  with  incurved  sides  (also  appearing  on  the  Al-‘Ubaid  pottery). 

(e)  The  use  of  horizontal  and  vertical  hatching  as  a border  pattern. 

(f)  Figure-of-eight  or  hiikraniiim  pattern  on  a hatched  or  stippled  ground. 

In  shape  the  vessels  of  the  two  periods  are  quite  different,  and  the  Jhukar  decoration  is 
much  more  advanced  and  sophisticated  in  style. 

It  is  difficult  to  explain  why  two  such  widely  separated  cultures  should  have  so  many 
points  in  common  as  regards  their  pottery  decoration,  for  to  term  these  fortuitous  appears 
to  me  to  under-estimate  the  evidence.  It  is  possible  that  the  Tell  Halaf  people  wandered 
far  afield,  taking  their  ceramic  craft  with  them,  and  though  the  distance  between  Northern 
Assyria  and  the  Indus  valley  is  roughly  fifteen  hundred  miles  as  the  crow  flies,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  about  two  thousand  years  divided  the  two  cultures,  ample  time  for  artistic 
conceptions  to  penetrate  from  one  far  country  to  another.  Some  authorities  consider  that 
the  Tell  Halaf  civilization  originated  in  Syria,^"^  and  resemblances  betw'een  its  potter)^  and 
that  of  Iran  and  Baluchistan  have  even  been  noted.*"’  From  the  latter  country  favoured 
patterns  could  easily  have  spread  to  India.  Sufficient  evidence  now  exists  to  prove  that  the 
Jhukar  people  in  later  times  also  had  associations  w'ith  their  neighbour  on  the  west. 

Relations  between  Jhukar  Pottery  and  some  Wares  of  Baluchistan.  It  has  been  known 
for  some  time  that  the  people  of  the  Harappa  culture  had  trading  relations  whth  Baluchistan; 
indeed,  they  may  have  had  settlements  there,  for  their  distinctive  products  have  been  found 

As  Pis.  XLVI,  1, 2,  6,  XLV,  32. 

Frontispiece  (b),  i,  3,  9,  XLII.  ii,  13,  15,  17,  XLVII,  13,  17-19,  ^4>  “7- 
1=1  PI.  XLVI,  12,  17. 

Pis.  XLV,  39,  XLVI,  6,  10,  28,  XLVII,  28. 

PI.  XLV,  39.  It  would  be  more  correct,  perhaps,  to  term  this  ground  “ filling,”  as  the  motif  was 
certainly  painted  first. 

With  this  Mr.  Mallowan  is  inclined  to  agree.  Prehistoric  Assyria,  p.  177. 

Op.  cit.,  p.  178. 


13° 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


in  many  parts  of  that  province.  The  same  trading,  and  perhaps  also  a cultural,  connection 
existed  in  the  Jhukar  Period,  for  certain  wares  which  are  either  of  Jhukar  manufacture 
or  locally  made  copies,  have  come  to  light  in  several  parts  of  Baluchistan.  I have  not  had 
an  opportunity  of  examining  these  painted  wares  closely,  hut  they  are  said  to  be  decorated 
in  black  and  are  sometimes  without  a slip,  features  which  also  appear  in  some  of  the 
Jhukar  pottery. 

Several  small  vessels  from  the  site  of  Periano-ghundai  in  North  Baluchistan  are 
very  similar  in  form  to  some  found  in  a burial  chamber  at  Damb-Buthi  in  Sindh. Mr. 
Majumdar  has  compared  this  burial-pottery  with  some  Amri  wares,  but  a large  jar  found 
with  it  singularly  resembles  a Jhukar  type;  moreover,  it  is  decorated  in  much  the  same  way 
as  a Jhukar  fragment  from  Chanhu-daro  seen  in  Pi.  XLV,  38. 

But  we  are  concerned  not  so  much  with  the  forms  of  these  Baluchistan  wares  as  with 
the  designs  they  bear.  Two  mounds  in  the  northern  part  of  that  province  have  yielded  some 
small  jars  on  which  is  depicted  the  same  plant  device  that  so  commonly  appears  on  the 
pottery  from  Chanhu-daro  (PI.  XLIII,  3,  7, 10,  etc.).^'“  Again  a sherd  from  Jai-damb  in 
Southern  Baluchistan  is  decorated  with  a ball  and  stem  motif  like  the  Jhukar  examples  in 
PI.  XLV,  25,  28,  35,  37,  etc.,^®**  and  another  from  Sar-Parom,  evidently  part  of  the  edge  of  a 
dish  of  a food-stand,  bears  a multiple  loop  pattern,  often  found  on  similar  Jhukar  dishes.^®^ 
Furthermore,  on  a sherd  from  Periano-ghundai  there  appears  the  figure  of  a running  animal, 
which  might,  though  with  less  certainty,  be  attributed  to  Jhukar  work,^®'  and  should  be 
compared  with  the  animal  illustrated  in  PI.  XLV,  21,  which  is  also  shown  in  motion. 

Mr.  Mallowan  has  pointed  out  that  “ certain  of  the  polychrome  sherds  of  Sur  Jangal 
and  related  wares,  in  feel,  colour,  and  minuteness  of  design,  bear  an  apparent  kinship  to 
that  of  Tell  Halaf”— but  bids  the  reader  to  beware  of  fortuitous  resemblances.”®  Apart 
from  its  polychrome  colouring  the  resemblance  between  the  Sur  Jangal  and  Jhukar  wares  is 
slight.  The  wavy  lines  in  two  colours  on  the  former  are  not  unlike  the  patterns  illustrated 
in  Pi.  XLII,  8,  9 of  this  book  and  a cross-like  marking  on  another  Sur  Jangal  sherd  has  its 
counterpart  on  the  Jhukar  dish  in  Pl.XLVII,  31.  In  all  probability  this  Sur  Jangal  pottery 
is  of  considerably  earlier  date  than  the  Jhukar  material  and  its  likeness  in  certain  respects 
to  the  Tell  Halaf  wares  is  perhaps  not  surprising,  for  the  two  types  were  possibly  separated 
by  a shorter  interval  of  time.  I can  see  no  connection  between  the  Sur  Jangal  wares  and 

No  slips  are  present  on  the  sherds  in  Pis.  XLIV,  6,  XL VII,  24,  27,  though  they  are  painted  in 
one  or  two  colours. 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pi.  VII. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXV,  26-43. 

Moghul-ghundai  and  Periano-ghundai:  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid.,  No.  37,  pis.  VII  (P.  C. 
10),  (P.  SW.  4),  Vlil'CP.  SW.  4),  (P.  SW.'c.  i),  XI  (MM.  E.  13,  15). 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pi.  Ill  (J.  D.  2), 

Op.  cit.  (S.  P.  6). 

Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pi.  X (P.  36). 

Prehistoric  Assyria,  p.  178;  cf.  Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pis.  XX,  XXL 

Op.  cit.,  pis.  XX  (S.  J.  vi.  8);  XXI  (S.  J.  16). 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  XXI  (S.  J.  107). 


POTTERY  OF  THE  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


131 

those  from  Periano-ghundai  and  Moghul-ghundai,  although  the  latter,  as  already  mentioned, 
appear  to  be  closely  related  to  the  Jhukar  pottery. 

If  the  Jhukar  people  were  actually  in  occupation  of  the  parts  of  Baluchistan  where  their 
relics  have  been  unearthed,  their  sphere  of  influence  must  have  been  considerable.  The 
Periano-ghundai  and  Moghul-ghundai  sites,  for  instance,  are  some  two  hundred  and  seventy 
miles  west  of  Chanhu-daro.  Chanhu-daro  is  mentioned  particularly  because  more  material 
of  the  Jhukar  Culture  has  been  found  there  than  anywhere  else.  But  this  settlement  was, 
after  all,  a small  and  comparatively  unimportant  one  and  more  relics  of  this  people  may 
eventually  come  to  light  in  greater  abundance  elsewhere.  It  is,  hov\ever,  doubtful  whether 
their  culture  extended  much  further  to  the  east  in  Sindh,  for  the  nature  of  the  country  in 
that  quarter  is  extremely  inhospitable. 


Chapter  VIII 


LATER  WARES,  AND  STONE  AND  FAIENCE  VESSELS 

This  chapter  deals  with  the  later  w'ares  found  at  Chanhu-daro  in  their  chronological 
order.  Further  particulars  of  this  pottery  will  he  found  in  the  catalogue  at  the  end  of  this 
book. 

Jhangar  Pottery 

An  appreciable  quantity  of  the  distinctive  material  belonging  to  this  culture  first 
appeared  about  two  miles  south  of  the  village  of  Jhangar  near  Sehwan.’^  Here  was  unearthed 
a considerable  amount  of  incised  pottery,  black  or  grey  in  colour,  of  a type  not  hitherto  met 
with  in  Sindh. 

During  the  preliminary  work  on  the  summit  of  Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro,  similar 
pottery  was  found  at  levels  ranging  from  18.9  to  22.3  feet  above  datum  level.  The  sherd 
illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIX,  7,  a and  the  small  bowls  in  Pi.  XL,  6, 9,  a came  from  much  lower 
le\els,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  these  pieces  had  rolled  down  the  mound  in  ancient  times 
and  had  then  become  buried. 

The  fact  that  this  pottery  was  found  at  such  high  levels  at  Chanhu-daro  proves  that 
the  people  who  made  it  occupied  Mound  II  after  the  Jhukar  people  had  deserted  it.  In 
some  cases  the  wares  lay  just  above  the  Jhukar  stratum,  in  others  there  was  a little  over- 
lapping, probably  the  result  of  the  soil  being  disturbed  by  later  searchers  for  building 
material.’^  At  Jhangar  itself,  however,  this  black  pottery  could  not  be  correlated  with  either 
earlier  or  later  wares;  possibly  the  site  itself  had  been  occupied  by  the  one  culture. 

At  Chanhu-daro  no  painted  wares  were  associated  with  this  dark-coloured  pottery. 
Jhangar,  however,  produced  with  it  a few  red  sherds  bearing  designs  in  chocolate-coloured 
paint  on  a cream  or  light  red  slip^  The  remarkable  resemblance  of  the  conjoined  jars  in 
XXXIX,  2 to  a painted  triad  of  red  clay  from  Baluchistan,  coupled  with  the  Jhangar 
evidence,  indicates  that  painted  red  wares  were  also  in  use  by  the  people  of  this  incised 
pottery. 

With  the  exception  of  the  roughly  made  kohl-jars  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  4,  5,  7, 
this  Jhangar  pottery  appears  to  have  been  raised  on  a slow  wheel  or  toiirnette.  It  is  true 
that  the  rims  of  some  of  the  vessels  show  slight  striations,  but  markings  such  as  these  are 
often  present  on  other  hand-made  pottery.  There  are  no  indications  that  wheel-marks  were 
removed  with  the  aid  of  a paddle,  that  instrument  always  betrays  itself  by  the  slight  faceting 
it  leaves  behind. 

The  Jhangar  pottery  from  Chanhu-daro  is  exceptionally  well  made  of  a light  or  dark- 

^ Majumdar,  Exflorations  in  Sind,  pp.  68-70,  78;  pis.  XXXI,  4-6,  11-13,  20-22,  27,  28,  32,  33; 
XXXV,  5,  10.  Jhangar  is  situated  about  43  miles  North-west  of  Chanhu-daro. 

^ It  should  be  remembered  that  Muhammadan  graves  of  an  early  date  were  found  on  the  summit 
and  sides  of  this  mound. 

® Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  79. 


132 


LATER  WARES,  AND  STONE  AND  FAIENCE  VESSELS 


133 


grey  paste  (sometimes  almost  black),  very  gritty  to  the  touch.  Lime  and  mica  were  used 
as  degraissants,  the  former  being  especially  conspicuous  in  the  dark-coloured  clay.  Most  of 
the  vessels  bear  polish  markings  caused  by  rubbing  their  surfaces  horizontally  with  a pebble 
or  piece  of  bone. 

A black  coating  which  adheres  very  closely  to  the  surface  of  the  pottery  but  has  not 
quite  the  same  appearance  as  a clay  slip,  is  to  be  seen  on  the  bowls  in  PI.  XL.  6,  7 and 
possibly  once  covered  the  rather  weathered  vessels  in  Pis.  XXXIX,  2,  XL,  7,  a.  This  coating 
may  have  been  caused  by  applying  to  the  surface  of  the  vessel  a resin  or  the  juice  of  a plant 
which  burned  black  when  the  pot  was  fired. 

The  grey  pastes  used  for  this  pottery  were  possibly  produced  by  mixing  with  the  clay 
some  kind  of  organic  matter.  This  would  carbonize  in  the  furnace  and  impart  to  the  clay 
the  grey  colour  and  the  gritty  feel  that  is  so  characteristic  of  it.^  jMarkings  on  some  of  the 
vessels  indicate  that  they  were  baked  in  an  open  furnace  heaped  over  with  chopped  straw 
or  reeds. ^ 

Most  of  this  pottery  is  well  made,  with  comparatively  thin  walls.  The  small  kohl-jars 
illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXIX,  4,  5, 7 are,  however  exceptions  and  are  of  the  roughest  work- 
manship; they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  the  work  of  an  experienced  potter.  The  restrained 
use  of  simple  patterns,  such  as  triangles,  chevrons,  and  zig-zags,  adds  greatly  to  the  beauty 
of  this  Jhangar  ware,  and  the  shapes  of  the  bowls,  especially  those  that  are  carinated,  are 
without  reproach. 

E.xcept  for  their  pottery,  the  Jhangar  people  left  nothing  behind  them  at  Chanhu-daro. 
Their  settlement  seems  to  have  been  a verj'  small  one,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  never 
occupied  Mound  II  permanently  at  all,  but  merely  used  it  as  a convenient  camping  site. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  burials  of  this  people  ever  took  place  there. 

At  Jhangar  itself  no  traces  were  found  of  any  buildings  that  could  be  ascribed  to  this 
grey  ware  folk  and  it  must,  therefore,  be  assumed  that  they  lived  in  huts  of  some  perishable 
material,  such  as  grass  or  matting.  The  very  appearance  of  their  pottery  suggests  that  they 
were  a primitive  people.  They  may  have  been,  indeed,  an  aboriginal  tribe,  like  the  Bhils, 
who  have  now  penetrated  into  Sindh  and  have  formed  little  communities,  which,  in  that 
province  at  least,  keep  strictly  to  themselves. 

Plate  XXXIX.  No.  I (see  also  Pi.  XL,  ii).  Dark  grey  with  polished  surface.  Three 
scored  lines,  partly  smoothed  over,  round  shoulder.  Well  made  and  regular  in  shape. 

No.  2.  Three  small  bowls,  each  2.4  inches  high,  joined  together.  Irregular  aperture, 
0.4  inch  in  diameter,  between  the  three  was  possibly  for  inserting  a rod  to  support  them  on  a 
stand.  Dark  grey,  porous  paste  containing  small  particles  of  lime.  Surface  coloured  black 
and  shows  horizontal  polish  markings.  Each  bowl  was  separately  made  and  joined  before 
the  clay  was  dry.  Found  with  the  kohl-jar  seen  in  No.  5. 

A group  almost  identical  with  the  above,  except  that  it  is  painted,  was  unearthed  at 

* This  method  of  producing  black  or  grey  wares  is  common  to  modem  as  well  as  ancient  primitive 
wares. 

^ These  markings  are  especially  noticeable  on  the  vessels  in  PI.  XXXIX,  3,  6,  8.  It  will  be  remem- 
bered that  straw  impressions  have  also  been  noted  on  the  Jhukar  pottery. 


134 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Shahi-tump  in  Southern  Baluchistan,  where  it  lay  about  five  feet  below  the  surface  sur- 
rounded by  painted  grey-coloured  vessels.®  It  would  thus  appear  that  these  two  triads  are 
products  of  the  same  culture,  vet  the  pottery  associated  with  Shahi-tump  specimen  is 
entirely  different  from  any  of  the  vessels  found  either  at  Jhangar  or  Chanhu-daro.' 

No.  3 (see  also  Pi.  XL,  9).  Dark  grey  ware,  no  slip.  Straw  markings  on  surface.  Thin 
for  its  size  and  decorated  with  two  shallow  grooves  round  the  shoulder,  which  have  become 
partly  obliterated  by  polishing. 

No.  4.  Dark  grey  paste.  2.36  inches  high.  Roughly  incised  triangles  with  single 
hatched  interiors  decorate  the  lower  portion  of  this  little  kohl-jar.  Thick  for  its  size  and 
with  little  interior  capacity,  the  diameter  of  its  mouth  being  only  0.24  inch. 

No.  5.  Dark  grey,  almost  black  paste.  3.77  inches  high  with  an  opening  0.32  inch 
in  diameter.  The  greater  part  of  this  cosmetic  jar  is  decorated  with  a deeply  incised  chevron 
pattern  set  between  triple  vertical  partitions.  Its  flat  rim  is  ornamented  with  roughly 
scratched  transverse  parallel  lines  arranged  in  three  groups  of  five  lines  each. 

No.  6 (see  also  Pi.  XL,  10).  Grey  paste  containing  a little  lime  and  mica.  Horizontal 
polish  markings  and  some  straw  impressions  on  face.  Two  incised  lines,  partly  smoothed 
over,  form  a kind  of  moulding  round  the  rim.  A row  of  deeply  incised  triangles  occurs  a 
little  lower  down. 

No.  7.  Dark  grey  almost  black  paste.  3.4  inches  high.  Aperture  0.28  inch  in  diameter. 
Rim  missing,  but  probably  resembled  that  of  No.  5,  the  decoration  of  the  two  specimens 
being  very  similar.  Has  little  capacity  and  was  found  to  contain  traces  of  a black  pigment 
which,  on  analysis,  proved  to  be  a simple  soot. 

No.  7,  a.  Grey-coloured  sherd  measuring  2.3  inches  across  and  0.21  inch  thick.  Bears 
slight  polish  and  is  ornamented  with  bands  of  incised  oblique  lines. 

No.  8 (see  also  Pi.  XL,  8).  Light  grey  paste.  The  partly  polished  surface  of  this  bowl 
is  pitted  here  and  there  with  straw  marks.  Incised  line  at  the  rim  and  a triple  row  of  zig-zaas 
just  above  its  carination. 

Plate  XL.  Nos.  8-1 1 in  this  plate  appear  in  photograph  in  PI.  XXXIX  and  have  already 
been  described. 

No.  5.  Dark  grey  paste.  Semi-polished  surface  showing  horizontal  rub-marks.  Incised 
lines  round  rim  and  shoulder. 

No.  6.  Grey  paste,  rather  lightly  baked.  Traces  of  a black  coating  which  does  not 
appear  to  be  that  of  a true  slip.  Band  of  incised  hatched  triangles  above  its  carination. 

No.  7.  Grey  paste  containing  lime  and  mica.  Evidences  of  a black  coating.  Thick 
for  size  and  has  a scored  line  just  below  the  rim. 

No.  7,  a.  Dirty-looking  grey  paste  containing  lime  and  mica.  Originally  coated  black. 

No.  9,  a.  Dirty  grey  paste.  No  signs  of  polish.  Rim  missing.  Decorated  with  an 
incised  pattern  of  oblique  lines  in  registers. 

® Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  hid..  No.  43,  pi.  XIII,  p.  93. 

’’  I can  find  no  evidence  of  incised  grey  pottery  occurring  in  Baluchistan  at  all.  The  Shahi-tump 
grey  pottery  is  thought  to  have  been  expressly  made  for  burial  purposes,  op.  cit.,  p.  99. 


LATER  WARES,  AND  STONE  AND  FAIENCE  VESSELS 


135 


Some  of  the  pottery  described  above  was  found  in  groups.  The  two  pieces  in  Pi. 
XXXIX,  2,  5 were  found  in  Square  8/D,  locus  82  (see  plan  in  Pi.  I)  at  the  level  + 22.0  feet. 
Square  9/D,  locus  95  contained  the  three  vessels  shown  in  Pis.  XXXIX,  i,  4,  XL,  5 at  the 
level  + 19.3  feet,  while  close  by  lay  two  other  bowls  (PI.  XXXIX,  6,  8)  at  the  level  + 22.2 
feet.  The  remaining  pieces  came  to  light  in  various  parts  of  Mound  II. 

Trihni  Ware 

In  the  preliminary  trenching  on  the  southern  side  of  Mound  II,  a number  of  painted 
sherds  were  found  at  levels  ranging  from  1.6  to  6.8  feet  below  datum  level  (pi.  XLV,  1-18). 
Other  pottery  of  the  same  description,  but  in  a badly  weathered  condition,  was  picked  up 
from  the  surface  of  the  plain,®  some  distance  from  the  mound.  All  this  material,  some  of 
which  is  painted  in  two  colours  in  addition  to  the  slip,  is  apparently  the  work  of  a people 
who  occupied  Sindh  some  considerable  time  after  the  close  of  the  Jhukar  Period. 

Pottery  of  exactly  the  same  type  has  appeared  at  two  other  sites  in  Sindh,  namely  at 
Trihni  and  at  Shah  Hasan,  both  being  close  to  the  shores  of  Lake  Manchhar.'*  These  two 
settlements  may  have  been  occupied  in  ancient  times  by  fisher-folk  who  left  behind  them 
little  beyond  their  pottery  and  some  coarse  flint  flakes.*"  I cannot  accept  the  view  that  the 
triangular  pottery  objects,  perforated  wares,  toy  cart-frames,  and  pieces  of  incised  food- 
stands  **  found  also  in  or  on  these  two  mounds  were  products  of  this  Trihni  people.  The 
water  stood  at  too  high  a level  in  both  mounds  for  a proper  examination  of  their  lower 
contents  to  be  made  and  their  excavator  himself,  after  noting  that  some  of  his  finds  closely 
resembled  objects  belonging  to  the  Harappa  Culture,  concluded  that  they  belonged  to  a 
later  phase  of  that  civilization.*^  That  the  mound  Trihni,  moreover,  had  some  connection 
with  the  Jhukar  people  appears  likely  as  evinced  by  the  fragment  of  a dish  bearing  a typical 
pattern  of  that  period  that  was  found  there.*® 

The  Trihni  ware  is  wheel-made,  of  a light  red  clay  containing  a small  percentage  of 
lime  and  sand,  the  latter  charged  with  mica.  It  differs  from  the  other  potter)'  of  Chanhu- 
daro  in  the  fact  that  the  back  of  every  sherd— nothing  like  a complete  vessel  has  been  found— 
is  thickly  coated  with  micaceous  sand.  This  was  evidently  applied  to  prevent  the  inside 
surface  of  a jar  from  sticking  to  a tool  held  against  it,  while  its  outer  parts  were  tapped  and 
consolidated  with  a paddle.**  This  particular  technique  produces  a ver)-  thin  pottery  with 
a smooth  but  unpolished  surface;  the  paddle,  when  properly  used,  leaves  an  almost 
imperceptible  faceting. 

The  slips  on  this  ware  are  never  polished  and  vary  greatly  in  colour  and  texture. 
Sometimes  they  are  so  thin  that  the  colour  of  the  pottery  shows  through;  on  some  sherds  the 

® About  5 ft.  below  datum.  Op.  cit.,  pp.  63,  72,  73. 

° Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pp.  60-65;  pb  XXIII.  Op.  cit.,  p.  63. 

” Op.  cit.,  pi.  XXIII,  35. 

This  use  of  a paddle  upon  pottery  is  known  in  modern  Eg^-pt,  Malay  States,  Ceylon,  and  the 
Solomon  Islands.  For  an  account  of  its  modern  use  in  Sindh,  see  Joiirn.  Roy.  Anthrop.  Inst.,  vol.  LX, 
p.  130.  The  Jhukar  fragment  of  a large  storage  jar  in  PI.  XLV,  39  has  also  been  treated  in  this  way 
but  is  quite  exceptional. 


136 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


coating  is  so  thick  that  it  tends  to  scale.  The  fragments  in  PL  XLV,  1-3,  5-7,  15,  18,  bear  a 
cream-coloured  slip  and  Nos.  4, 10,  1 1,  and  17  a pink  coating.  A very  distinct  yellow  appears 
on  Nos.  12,  14,  and  16  and  Nos.  8 and  9 have  no  slip  at  all. 

Black  and  red  are  the  two  colours  most  used,  the  former  being  employed  for  the 
motifs  and  the  latter  for  the  horizontal  bands,  which  are  a feature  of  the  scheme  of  decora- 
tion. These  bands  are  often  edged  with  a deeper  shade  of  red  or  with  black.  The  motifs  in 
Pi.  XLV,  1,17  are  outlined  in  brown  paint  and  those  in  Nos.  2 and  13  with  red,  while  this 
colour  appears  with  black  or  brown  to  embellish  the  patterns  on  Nos.  i,  9,  and  16. 

This  Trihni  ware  resembles  the  earlier  Jhukar  pottery  as  far  as  the  use  of  red  bands 
and  the  occasional  employment  of  a pink  slip  or  a brown  paint  are  concerned,  but  the 
similarity  ceases  when  a closer  examination  is  made,  for  there  is  no  resemblance  whatever 
between  the  fabrics  used  in  the  two  periods  or  between  the  decorative  motifs  employed. 

The  reasons  for  assuming  that  the  Trihni  pottery  is  of  fairly  late  date  are  as  follows: 
(a)  its  position  at  Chanhu-daro  where  it  was  found  either  on  the  surface  of  the  plain  or 
beneath  late  debris  that  had  been  washed  down  the  sides  of  Mound  11;  (b)  its  resemblance 
to  the  modern  wares  of  Sindh  rather  than  to  the  earlier  pottery  on  which  the  paddle  was 
not  employed;  (c)  the  presence  of  the  palmetto  ornament  on  a sherd  from  Trihni,^^  which 
can  hardly  be  dated  prior  to  the  VII  Century  b.c.;  also,  the  very  realistic  figure  of  a duck 
or  goose  in  Pi.  XLV,  2 is  not  of  early  style. 

Until  we  can  correlate  this  pottery  with  later  material  we  may  provisionally  assign  it 
to  the  centuries  immediately  preceding  the  Christian  era. 

Plate  XLV.  No.  I.  4.04  inches  long;  0.14  inch  thick.  Part  of  the  shoulder  of  a large 
vessel.  Cream  slip.  Decorated  with  seven  red  spots  enclosed  in  a circle  of  brown  paint  and 
with  a group  of  five  wavy  lines,  also  in  brown.  At  the  corners  of  the  parallelogram  formed 
by  the  lines  are  spots  of  red  paint.  Red  bands,  edged  with  brown  paint,  border  the  design 
above  and  below. 

No.  2.  5.7  inches  long;  o.  19  inch  thick.  Portion  of  rim  and  shoulder  of  jar.  The  duck 
or  goose  is  painted  in  a purplish-red  on  a cream  slip.  Light  red  bands  above  and  below 
bordered  by  darker  lines.  The  bird  is  shown  preening  its  feathers  and  the  ruffling  of  the 
breast  provides  a realistic  touch. 

No.  3.  1.72  inches  long;  o.i  inch  thick.  Pattern  in  black  on  a cream-coloured  slip. 

No.  4.  3.82  inches  long  by  0.2  inch  thick.  Part  of  the  rim  and  neck  of  a large  jar. 

Black  zig-zag  pattern  and  spots  on  a pink  slip,  bordered  by  dark  red  bands. 

No.  5.  2.9  inches  long  by  0.2  inch  thick.  Part  of  the  rim  and  neck  of  a jar.  Zig-zag 
lines  and  spots  in  black  on  a cream  slip.  Red  band  round  top  of  rim  with  triangles  in  black. 

No.  6.  5.4  inches  long  by  0.18  inch  thick.  Fragment  of  the  neck  and  shoulder  of  a 
large  jar.  Purplish-black  motifs  on  a cream  ground.  Light  red  bands,  edged  with  a darker 
shade  above  and  below. 

No.  7.  5.26  inches  long.  Rim  of  large  vessel.  Pattern  in  purple-black  on  a cream  slip. 
Light  red  band  below. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXIII,  10,  41. 


LATER  WARES,  AND  STONE  AND  FAIENCE  VESSELS 


137 


No.  8.  1.95  inches  long  by  0.16  inch  thick.  Purplish-black  motif  painted  directly  on 
the  surface  of  the  pottery. 

No.  9.  4.2  inches  long  by  0.2  inch  thick.  Plant  motif  in  light  red  and  black  on  the 
natural  surface  of  the  pottery. 

No.  10.  2.9  inches  long  by  0.22  inch  thick.  Part  of  neck  and  shoulder  of  medium- 
sized jar.  Black  motifs  on  a pink-coloured  slip.  Light  red  band  above  bordered  by  black. 

No.  1 1 . 2.75  inches  long  by  o.  1 5 inch  thick.  Dark  red  motifs  on  a pink  ground  with 
black  lines  above  and  below. 

No.  1 2.  3.3  inches  long  by  0.21  inch  thick.  Black  loops  on  a light  yellow  slip,  bordered 
by  dark  red  bands  edged  with  black. 

No.  13.  2. 1 5 inches  long  by  0.19  inch  thick.  Dark  red,  wavy  zig-zag  line  and  spots 
on  a pink-coloured  slip. 

No.  14.  1.62  inches  long  by  0.13  inch  thick.  Purplish-black  motifs  on  a yellow 
ochre  slip. 

No.  15.  2.77  inches  long  by  0.19  inch  thick.  Black  loops  on  a cream  ground,  with  a 
light  red  band  edged  with  black  below. 

No.  1 6.  1 .92  inches  long  by  o.  1 3 inch  thick.  Red  and  black  loops  on  a yellow  slip. 

No.  17.  6.0  inches  long.  Portion  of  rim  of  large  vessel.  Brown  coloured  motifs  on  a 
pink  slip. 

No.  18.  6.31  inches  long  and  varj'ing  from  0.15  to  0.25  inches  in  thickness.  Part  of 
rim  and  shoulder  of  large  vessel.  Circles  and  groups  of  lines  in  purplish-black  on  a cream- 
coloured  ground.  Light  red  band  edged  with  dark  red  appears  between  the  motifs  and  rim. 
Inside  the  brim  are  dark  red  lines. 

A favourite  motif  on  this  Trihni  ware  is  a zig-zag  line  with  the  intervals  hlled  in  with 
spots  (Pl.XLV,  4,  5, 13).  This  form  of  decoration,  simple  as  it  is,  does  not  appear  on  the 
Jhukar  and  Harappa  pottery,  though  it  is  common,  but  without  the  spots,  on  wares  from 
other  sites.  The  large  roundel  with  spots  inside,  shewn  in  Pl.XLV,  i,  may  be  compared 
with  one  on  a sherd  unearthed  at  Trihni.'®  Another  fragment  of  pottery  from  Shah  Hasan  ” 
bears  a pattern  identical  with  the  one  appearing  in  Pi.  XLV,  7, 1 7. 

This  kind  of  pottery  does  not  appear  to  have  been  made  anywhere  in  Baluchistan, 
but  only  personal  handling  of  material  from  that  country  would  settle  the  point.  In  any 
case  the  people  who  made  it  do  not  seem  to  have  belonged  to  an  important  culture  and  it  is, 
therefore,  unlikely  that  articles  made  by  them  would  travel  far  beyond  the  places  where 
they  were  produced. 

Muhammadan  Pottery 

Before  concluding  this  survey  of  the  various  wares  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  mention 
must  be  made  of  some  large  pottery  vessels  that  were  used  to  roof  the  brick-lined  graves 
found  on  the  summit  and  slopes  of  Mound  II  and  described  in  Chapter  III. 

The  three  large  jars  shown  in  Pi.  XL,  1-3  formed  part  of  a group  of  seven  used  to  cover 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXIII,  36. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  XXIII,  45. 


138 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


a Muhammadan  tomb.  The  photograph  of  an  adjacent  tomb  in  PL  XVII(d)  shows  how 
these  were  arranged;  their  original  position  on  the  mound  will  be  seen  in  PI.  Ill,  Square 
7/E,  locus  88,  where  six  of  these  tombs  were  discovered  in  two  groups  of  three.  They, 
and,  of  course,  the  pottery  covering  them,  date  from  about  the  XVII  Century  a.  d.  Certain 
bricks  used  to  line  them  are  of  the  same  type  as  those  used  in  a Muhammadan  cemetery, 
now  deserted,  about  half-a-mile  to  the  south  of  Chanhu-daro.’® 

The  three  jars  that  we  illustrate  are  exceedingly  well  made.  Their  thin  walls,  dressed 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Trihni  pottery  by  a paddle,  are  as  perfect  as  when  they  left  the  potter. 
They  are  made  of  the  same  clay  as  that  employed  for  the  more  ancient  wares  and  both 
lime  and  sand  were  used  as  tempering  materials.  An  interesting  feature  of  this  pottery  is 
the  thick  coating  of  sand  that  covers  their  lower  portions  on  the  outside.  It  has  already 
been  mentioned  that  some  of  the  storage  jars  made  by  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture 
were  also  treated  in  this  manner,  a process  still  carried  out  in  Sindh  to-day.  It  is  said  that 
the  extra  thickness  helps  to  keep  the  contents  of  a jar  cool.^** 

Nos.  I and  2 in  PI.  XL  have  a cream-coloured  slip.  The  neck  and  rim  of  the  latter 
is  coated  inside  and  out  with  a thick  polished  red  slip.  No.  i is  decorated  with  purplish- 
black  lines  enclosing  broad  bands  of  a light  red  colour  and  No.  2 has  bands,  spots,  and 
lattice  pattern,  all  painted  in  a light  red  colour.  A prominent  rib  encircles  this  last  jar, 
incised  with  oblique  markings  that  are  cross-hatched  at  intervals.  No.  3 in  the  same  plate  has 
no  slip.  Its  upper  portion  is  very  smoothly  finished  but  not  polished  and  its  lower  portion  as 
far  up  as  to  the  line  has  an  exceptionally  thick  coating  of  sand. 

This  use  of  spot  motifs  and  of  red  bands  on  these  late  Sindhi  vessels  is  of  considerable 
interest,  for  they  are  direct  survivals  of  some  of  the  Jhukar  forms  of  decoration,  carried 
through,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the  Trihni  people.  Red  bands,  indeed,  remain  a favourite 
form  of  pottery  ornamentation  in  the  remoter  parts  of  Sindh  to-day. 


Stone  Vessels 

Few  recognizable  fragments  of  stone  vessels  have  been  recovered  at  Chanhu-daro, 
and  of  these  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain  the  original  forms  of  only  three  examples. 

No.  47  in  Pi.  XXIX  (2984).  In  three  fragments.  Light  grey  sandstone. 

No.  48  (2245).  Dark  grey  sandstone  fragment.  Smoothly  hnished  inside  and  out  but 
unpolished. 

No.  30  in  Pi.  XCIII  (2178).  2.55  inches  long;  0.23  inch  thick.  Dark  grey  steatite. 
Fragment  of  dish  broken  anciently  and  repaired.  Seven  small  rivet  holes,  averaging  0.02 
inch  in  diameter  along  is  broken  edge.  Well  made  but  surface  finish  not  particularly  good. 

The  above  three  dishes  belong  to  the  Harappa  Period;  the  first  two  are  of  poor 
quality  stone. 

A gravestone  in  this  cemetery  is  dated  to  1031  of  the  Hegira. 

This  is  peculiar  to  the  Sindh  wares,  whether  ancient  or  modern. 


LATER  WARES,  AND  STONE  AND  FAIENCE  VESSELS 


139 


Faience  Vessels 

These  also  are  rare,  possibly  for  the  reason  that  the  inhabitants  of  Chanhu-daro  were, 
in  the  main,  too  poor  to  use  such  expensive  luxuries.  That  glazing,  however,  was  extensively 
practised  at  this  site  is  proved  by  the  many  materials  found  that  were  employed  in  this 
process.  Three  of  the  four  specimens  that  we  are  able  to  illustrate  (Pis.  XXIX,  54,  56, 
LXXXIX,  2)  can  be  assigned  to  the  Harappa  Period,  two  of  these  being  found  on  Mound  1. 
One  (PI.  XXIX,  55)  w’as  taken  from  a high  level  on  Alound  II  and  may  be  either  of  Jhukar 
work  or  re-used  in  that  period.  The  cores  of  all  three  are  white  or  light  grey  in  colour. 

No.  54  in  PI.  XXIX  (4720).  2.09  inches  high.  Neck  and  rim  of  tall  vessel.  Light 
green  glaze.  Incised  with  chevron  pattern.  Hole  through  neck  is  0.25  inch  in  diameter. 
Small  hole  on  each  side  of  rim,  possibly  to  secure  a cover.  Evidently  a portion  of  a kohl-jar  of 
a type  perhaps  once  resembling  the  bronze  jar  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  39. 

No.  55(1487).  1.3  inches  high.  Light  green  glaze.  Small  hole  on  each  side  and 

incised  line  just  below  rim.  Inside  this  little  cosmetic  vessel  are  brown  stains  suggesting 
that  it  had  once  held  a scented  fat  or  ointment. 

No.  56(4743).  1.42  inches  high.  Glaze  now  light  grey  in  colour.  Two  small  holes 
through  neck  not  exactly  opposite  to  one  another. 

No.  2 in  PI.  LXXXIX  (2936).  1.5  inches  high.  Traces  of  glaze  of  a light  green  colour. 
Scoring  on  the  base  of  this  little  cosmetic  jar  proves  that  it  was  made  or  hnished  on  a wheel. 


Chapter  IX 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 

The  seals,  seal-amulets  and  seal  impressions  described  in  this  Chapter  fall  naturally 
into  two  groups:  (a)  Those  of  the  Jhukar  Culture,  and  (b)  those  which  belong  to  the 
earlier  Harappa  Culture.  I have  mentioned  in  Chapter  III  the  presence  at  some  later  date 
on  the  summit  of  Mound  II  of  an  apparently  primitive  people,  much  of  whose  dark  grey, 
polished  ware  was  decorated  with  simple  geometric  patterns.  These  people,  however,  as 
far  as  we  are  at  present  aware,  neither  made  nor  used  seals  or  seal-amulets.  It  is  convenient 
to  describe  the  Jhukar  group  first,  as  they  are  types  which  are  quite  new  to  us.  They 
were  made  and  used  by  a people  whose  pottery  also  has  shown  them  to  have  been  of 
another  family  than  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  with  whose  products  we  are  so  well 
acquainted  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa. 

Seal-Amulets  and  hnfressions  of  the  Jhtikar  Period 

These  Jhukar  seals  and  amulets  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  XLIX,  L,  LXXXVII,  and  it  will 
be  seen  how  radically  different  they  are  both  in  shape  and  in  the  designs  they  bear  from 
those  of  the  Harappa  Culture  (Pis.  LI,  LII).  They  can  be  divided  into  four  types,  though 
it  is  not  yet  quite  certain  that  the  last  type  actually  belongs  to  the  Jhukar  Period.  I prefer 
the  term  “ seal-amulets  ” to  “ seals,”  for  many  of  these  objects  could  not  have  been  used  to 
make  impressions;  in  fact,  some  of  them  had  been  impressed  by  seals  or  stamps  and  were 
presumably  carried  merely  for  their  amuletic  properties.  Indeed,  it  is  far  from  certain  that 
the  so-called  “ seals  ” of  the  Harappa  Culture  (Pis.  LI  and  LII)  were  really  seals,  and  I 
have  always  termed  them  seal-amulets  as  they  would  have  served  either  purpose. 

(I).  Bead-amulets,  lenticular  or  round,  with  more  or  less  convex  faces,  a curved  edge, 
and  perforated  transversely.  This  type  of  amulet  was  made  of  pottery  (Pis.  XLIX, 
7,  9,  1 1 -1 3,  L,  2, 9,  1 1,  12,  14,  1 5)  or  stone  (Pis.  L,  4,  16;  LXXXVII,  i).  One  or 
both  faces  bear  incised  designs. 

(II).  Bead-amulets,  round,  with  flat  faces  and  edge,  the  latter  sometimes  with  two  or 
three  grooved  lines  as  decoration.  This  type  was  apparently  not  made  of  pottery. 
One  stone  (Pis.  L,  i,  LXXXVII,  20)  and  five  faience  specimens  were  found  (Pis. 
L,  5, 7,8,10,  LXXXVII,  23, 24). 

(III).  Handled  amulets,  round,  with  only  one  inscribed  face  and  roughly  made  per- 
forated handle  at  the  back,  as  seen  in  Pi.  XLIX,  1,3,  14,  15.  The  majority  were 
made  of  pottery  (Pis,  XLIX,  1,3,  10, 14,  15,  L,  13),  others  are  in  faience  (Pi. 
XLIX,  2, 4,  5),  but  several  of  superior  make  are  stone  (Pi.  XLIX,  6 or  metal 
(PI.  XLIX,  8).  Like  the  handleless  types,  they  bear  varied  devices. 

The  handles  of  the  amulets  of  this  type  vary  somewhat  in  shape.  The  most 
common  form  is  seen  in  PI.  XLIX,  i,  3, 6,  14.  No.  8 in  PI.  XLIX  is  ledge-like  in 


140 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 


141 

form,  and  to  judge  from  a fracture  on  its  back  No.  10  in  the  same  plate  had 
once  a handle  of  similar  shape.  The  square  amulet,  PI.  L,  6,  has  a pierced  rec- 
tangular lug  at  the  back  which  is  obviously  unfinished;  it  may  have  been  intended 
to  take  the  round  boss-like  shape  that  is  so  common  in  the  seals  of  the  Harappa 
Culture,  but  some  uncertainty  about  this  last  specimen  makes  it  possible  that  it 
belongs  to  the  earlier  period. 

The  faience  amulets  (Pi.  XLIX,  4,  5)  also  have  perforated  handles  at  the 
hack,  and  the  very  rough  handle  of  No.  15  in  Pi.  XLIX  was  more  useful  than  any 
of  the  better  finished  examples. 

(IV).  A fourth  type,  akin  to  Type  I,  is  elliptical,  with  slightly  rounded  faces,  and  is 
perforated  longitudinally  (Pi.  L,  3).  It  is  made  of  glazed  paste  and  is  the  only 
one  of  its  shape  to  be  found. 

With  the  exception  of  Nos.  2,  5,6,  10  in  Pi.  XLIX  and  Nos.  i and  4 in  PL  L,  these 
amulets  were  coarsely  and  roughly  made.  Nor  is  it  likely,  as  already  stated,  that  many  of 
them  were  used  as  seals.  No.  1 5 in  Pi.  XLIX  is  so  undercut  that  it  was  difficult  to  obtain  an 
impression  from  it.  Here  it  should  be  noted  that  where  impressions  could  be  made  they  are 
illustrated;  No.  6,  a in  Pi.  XLIX  and  No.  9 in  Pl.L  are  photographs  of  the  actual  faces. 

The  designs  on  these  amulets,  though  mostly  very  simple,  vary  considerably.  No.  1 5,  a 
in  Pi.  XLIX  resembles  No.  12  with  the  addition  of  a ring  to  frame  it,  and  there  is  some 
similarity  between  PI.  XLIX,  4 and  that  on  PI.  L,  5.  Some  of  the  designs  suggest  home 
manufacture,  as,  for  instance.  Nos.  7, 12,  and  15,  a in  Pi.  XLIX. 

The  amulets  in  faience  are  greatly  superior  in  finish  to  those  made  of  potter)^  they 
could  hardly  have  been  made  by  any  but  a skilled  craftsman.  And  the  stone  amulets 
(Pis.  XLIX,  6,  L,  1,4,  16)  are  so  advanced  in  technique  and  finish  that  very  considerable 
time  and  trouble  must  have  been  taken  over  their  manufacture. 

All  except  one  of  the  amulets  of  this  group  were  found  on  Mound  II  at  varying  levels. 
Nos.  I,  3-5,  9-1 1,  13,  1 5 in  Pi.  XLIX,  Nos.  3,  5,  7-9,  12,  13,  16  in  PI.  L,  and  No.  24  in  PI. 
LXXXVII  were  found  close  to  the  summit  of  the  mound  at  levels  ranging  from  1 1.5  to  20.2 
feet  above  datum,  i.  e.,  at  an  average  of  + 15.7  feet.  No.  6 in  PI.  XLIX  came  from  the 
summit  of  Mound  I at  the  level  + 13.6  feet.  The  remaining  specimens,  namely,  thirteen 
out  of  a total  of  thirty-one,  were  unearthed  on  the  sides  of  Mound  II  at  levels  ranging  from 
+ 0.8  to  + 1 1.5  feet— the  important  amulet.  No.  i in  PI.  L,  from  the  low  level  — o.i  foot— 
whither  they  had  rolled  or  been  sw'ept  down  from  their  original  level  by  the  rain-storms 
which  have  left  their  mark  on  the  sides  of  the  mound  as  deep  gulleys  and  w'ater-courses. 

Here  it  should  be  mentioned  that  none  of  the  typical  Harappa  seal-amulets  were 
found  at  a higher  level  than  + 15.4  feet  (Pi.  LII,  16).  The  amulet  (Pi.  L,  9)  found  at 
+ 1 7.7  feet  seems  to  have  been  impressed  by  a square  seal  of  a type  well  known  at  both 
Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  w'hich  has  not  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro.^  Possibly  the 
seal  itself  was  picked  up  at  a lower  level  and  used  by  one  of  the  Jhukar  people  to  impress 

^ Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro  (F.  E.  M.),  pi.  XCI,  i . 


142 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


this  amulet.  One  or  two  other  amulets  in  the  Jhukar  level  show  dehnite  indications  of  the 
influence  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  notably  Nos.  7 and  8 in  Pi.  L,  the  pattern  on  which  is 
obviously  derived  from  the  intersecting-circle  design  of  former  days.  Despite  this  resem- 
blance, however,  neither  of  these  two  amulets  is  in  make  and  shape  really  like  any  from 
Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa.  I am  doubtful  about  No.  6 in  Pi.  L,  which  was  found  at  a 
level  which  would  lead  one  to  date  it  to  the  Harappa  Period.  It  is  made  of  dark  brown 
steatite,  and  on  it  is  engraved  an  antelope  standing  in  a thicket,  a somewhat  unconventional 
device  for  a seal  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  Save  for  these  few  examples,  the  Jhukar  amulets 
are  quite  unlike  those  used  by  the  people  of  the  earlier  period. 

The  designs  in  Pis.  XLIX,  5,  L,  8,  a,  13  are  undoubtedly  solar  motifs;  the  radial  mark- 
ings in  the  first  are  very  pronounced.  A human  figure  is  certainly  portrayed  in  Pi.  L,  3, 
very  stiffly  executed  and  not  unlike  some  of  the  figures  common  in  the  Harappa  script. 
Animals  are  somewhat  rare.  The  two  couchant  antelopes,  one  above  the  other,  on  the 
pottery  seal  in  Pi.  XLIX,  i o,  certainly  show  an  Elamite  touch  in  their  arrangement. 
Couchant  animals  very  rarely  appear  in  prehistoric  Indian  glyptic  art.  I know  of  only  one 
example  from  Mohenjo-daro,  which,  for  this  and  other  reasons,  I regard  as  an  importation.^ 
Both  sides  of  the  white  steatite  bead-amulet  in  Pi.  L,  i show  scenes  that  are  unusual  on 
Indian  seals.  The  standing  ibex  with  massive  horns  and  the  conventional  leaf  motifs  used 
to  fill  in  the  bare  spaces  around  it  are  unknown  on  the  seal-amulets  of  the  Harappa  Culture; 
so  also  is  the  couchant  antelope  on  the  reverse,  with  the  secondary  flower  motif  (pome- 
granate?) and  other  devices.  Both  the  shape  and  the  animals  engraved  upon  this  seal  are 
quite  foreign  to  anything  found  in  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Particularly  interesting  is  the  seal  pictured  in  Pi.  L,  4,  4,  a.  It  is  fashioned  from  a very 
hard,  cream-coloured  stone,  its  faces  are  rounded,  and  its  motifs  most  unusual.®  The 
endless  coil  pattern  on  one  side  is  quite  unlike  the  rare  coil  patterns  of  Mohenjo-daro.^ 
On  the  other  side  there  is  an  apparently  composite  animal,  a combination  of  a humped  bull 
and  a rhinoceros,  with  a tail  bent  over  its  back  that  does  not  properly  belong  to  either  of 
these  animals.  This  seal,  for  as  such  it  was  probably  used,  was  very  carefully  cut  and  has  a 
milled  edge  shown  in  Pi.  LXXXVII,  i,  through  which  it  is  pierced  for  suspension. 

In  PI. XLIX,  I, a two  oxen,  one  above  the  other,  face  to  the  right,  and  on  the  much 
defaced  amulet.  No.  9 in  the  same  plate,  there  seems  to  be  an  antelope,  facing  to  the  left. 
There  are  also  two  animals  on  each  side  of  the  pottery  amulet  in  PL  L,  14,  14,  a.  Very 
conventional  trees  are  seen  on  the  copper  or  bronze  seal  (Pi.  XLIX,  8,  a)  and  the  clay  amulet 
(PI.  L,  ii).  The  coiled  pattern  on  the  reverse  of  this  last  amulet  is  similar  to  the  pattern 
incised  on  the  handle  of  a jar-cover  of  Jhukar  date,  seen  in  PL  XLVIII,  ii.  No.  15,  a 
in  PL  L is  rather  a puzzle.  Though  there  appear  to  he  three  serpents  on  the  upper  part  of 
this  pottery  amulet,  erect  and  ready  to  strike,  the  markings  below  are  not  correctly  placed  if 
they  are  indeed  intended  to  represent  the  tails  of  the  supposed  reptiles. 

^ F.  E.  M.,  pi.  C(b). 

^ The  stone  from  which  this  seal  was  cut  appears  to  be  identical  with  that  of  the  seal  mentioned 
in  note  i above. 

^ M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXVIll,  5;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXXXII,  3,  XC,  23. 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 


143 


In  some  respects  the  design  in  Pi.  L,  7 resembles  those  on  certain  copper  seals  found  by 
Sir  Aurel  Stein  at  Shahi-tump  in  Southern  Baluchistan.®  The  latter  seals  were  all  associated 
with  burials  in  the  upper  levels  of  that  mound;  they  are  therefore  late  in  date,  for  the  burials 
took  place  when  the  mound  was  already  of  considerable  age  and  had  been  badly  denuded.® 
But  the  pottery  found  with  these  Shahi-tump  seals  in  no  way  resembles  that  of  the  Jhukar 
Culture  at  Chanhu-daro;  indeed,  it  differs  from  it  as  much  as  does  the  latter  ware  from  that 
of  the  Harappa  Culture.  The  Shahi-tump  copper  seals,  however,  may  be  allied  to  the  group 
of  three  small  bowls ' joined  together,  which  was  also  found  on  this  mound  and  is  identical 
in  shape  with  a similar  vessel  of  the  Jhangar  Period  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  (Pi.  XXXIX, 
2),  particulars  of  which  are  given  in  Chapter  VIII.  Apart  from  these  copper  seals, 
therefore,  and  the  triplet  bowls  already  noted  and  some  few  sherds  and  vessels,  the  latter 
undoubtedly  of  Jhukar  work,®  we  can  trace  few  definite  connections  between  the  ancient 
Baluchi  and  the  Jhukar  Cultures. 

There  are  no  characters  or  pictographs  on  any  of  the  amulets  of  this  period,  unless  the 
marks  in  the  upper  parts  of  Nos.  i, a and  9 in  Pi. XLIX  were  intended  to  be  signs;  but  the 
majority  of  the  amulets  are  so  roughly  executed  that  it  seems  probable  that  they  were  made 
by  illiterate  craftsmen  and  for  uneducated  people.  It  is  unsafe,  however,  to  assume  that 
writing  was  unknown  in  the  Jhukar  Period  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  any  script  on  these 
amulets,  even  though  practically  every  amulet  and  seal-amulet  from  Mohenjo-daro  and 
Harappa  bore  an  inscription  of  some  kind. 

Round  seals  or  amulets  are  exceedingly  rare  in  the  Harappa  Culture,  hut  all  the  Jhukar 
amulets  are  of  that  shape  except  No.  6 in  Pi.  XLIX  and  Nos.  3 and  6 in  PI.  L.  A great 
many  are  lentoid  with  rounded  edges  and  faces  that  range  from  being  flat  to  having  a 
pronounced  convexity.  Four  of  them,  Nos.  i,  5,  8 in  Pi.  L and  No.  24  in  Pi.  LXXXVII,  of 
which  the  first  is  stone  and  the  others  faience,  have  edges  square  cut  and  flat,  and  ornamented 
with  two  or  three  grooves  running  round  them,  giving  them  a fluted  appearance. 

There  is  a curious  ornamentation  on  the  bevelled  edge  of  the  square  seal  in  Pi.  XLIX,  6, 
which  has  been  carefully  notched  all  round.  The  edge  of  the  fine  stone  seal  PI.  L,  4 had 
been  milled  to  enhance  its  appearance,  as  will  be  seen  in  Pi.  LXXXVII,  i.  The  shape  of 
No.  9 in  PI.  L,  which  is  so  round  that  it  might  almost  be  termed  a bead,  prevented  a satis- 
factory impression  being  taken;  it  was  therefore  photographed  direct. 

The  larger  number  of  amulets  have  no  handles,  but  that  they  were  all  worn  on  a cord 
or  wire  is  shown  by  the  holes  that  perforate  them.  Some  of  these  holes,  as  for  example  in 
PI.  XLIX,  13,  are  badly  worn;  obviously  many  of  these  amulets  were  continually  carried 
about.  In  the  hole  of  the  glazed  amulet  Pi.  L,  7 a fragment  of  the  copper  wire  still  remained. 
That  some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  boring  the  stone  amulet  Pi.  L,  16  is  proved  by  its 
sharply  biconical  hole. 

The  majority  of  these  objects  were  made  of  ordinary  clay,  of  a light  red  colour  and 

® Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  43,  pi.  XIV. 

® Op.  cit.,  p.  98. 

’’  Op.  cit.,  p.  93;  pi.  XIII,  vi.  3. 

® Stein,  Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.,  No.  37,  pis.  VI,  VII,  XI. 


144 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


frequently  containing  mica.  Nos.  lo  in  Pi.  XLIX  and  ii  in  Pi.  L were  made  of  drab- 
coloured  clay,  and  No.  i in  Pi.  XLIX  and  No.  12  in  Pi.  L of  grey  clay.  Not  one  of  the 
amulets  had  either  slip  or  wash  to  improve  its  appearance,  as  was  almost  invariably  the 
rule  with  the  pottery  amulets  of  the  Harappa  Period.® 

On  those  amulets  which  had  handles  the  latter  were  rarely  sufficiently  large  or  suitably 
shaped  for  them  to  be  held  easily  between  the  fingers.  Like  those  on  the  seal-amulets  of  the 
Harappa  Culture,  they  could  only  have  been  held  firmly  with  the  assistance  of  the  cord 
which  passed  through  them,  and  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  the  handle  was  dispensed 
with  on  many  of  the  amulets  and  a hole  through  the  article  itself  substituted. 

In  most  cases  the  designs  on  the  amulets,  whether  of  pottery  or  faience,  were  cut  with  a 
knife  or  some  other  sharp  tool,  though  possibly  not  always  so,  for  the  glaze  is  apt  to  obscure 
such  details.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  a chisel  or  gouge  was  used  on  the  amulets 
in  Pis.  XLIX,  15,  L,  3.  The  roughness  of  the  former  suggests  that  it  was  left  unfinished. 

A certain  resemblance  can  be  traced  between  these  amulets  and  those  of  the  archaic 
period  of  Elam,  the  chief  difference  being  that  the  latter  objects  were  mostly  made  of 
stone  and  the  majority  of  those  from  Chanhu-daro  of  pottery.^"  Even  the  very  curious 
amulet  in  PI.  XLIX,  7,  is  comparable  with  a limestone  seal  from  Persia  both  in  shape  and  in 
the  pitted  design  it  hears. “ No.  1 3 in  Pi.  L also  has  the  same  motif  as  on  a stone  amulet 
unearthed  in  Persia.^^ 

But  the  amulets  from  Chanhu-daro  are  of  later  date  than  the  archaic  objects  from 
Elam— probably  a thousand  years  later— and  we  must  look  further  afield  for  resemblances 
of  contemporary  date.  The  coil  pattern  on  the  fine  stone  seal  Pi.  L,  4 is  practically  identical 
with  that  on  a round  haematite  seal  said  to  be  Hittite;  and,  indeed,  many  of  the  other 
amulets  in  Pis.  XLIX,  L resemble  in  designs  and  shape  certain  Syro-Cappadocian  seal- 
amulets.  It  would  seem  that  in  Elamite  art  there  was  a resuscitation  of  old  forms  of  seals  and 
their  primitive  designs,  which  doubtless  arrived  from  the  west,  and  it  is  to  the  same  source 
that  we  may  perhaps  also  trace  the  new  form  of  seal-amulet  that  quite  suddenly  appeared 
in  India  after  the  long  vogue  of  the  square  and  rectangular  Harappa  seals  with  their 
animal  devices. 

It  is  even  possible  that  the  stone  seal  pictured  in  PI.  L,  4,  4a  came  from  Elam  or 
Cappadocia  despite  the  fact  that  the  rhinoceros  that  is  engraved  on  one  side  suggests  Indian 
work.“  The  shape  of  this  seal-amulet  and,  in  particular,  its  rope  design,  together  with  the 
unusual  stone  of  which  it  is  made,*^  appear  to  me  to  point  to  western  workmanship.  About 

“ Generally  this  was  red. 

Delaporte,  Cat.  des  Cyli.,  1. 1,  pi.  14,  nos.  4a,  4b,  5,  6a,  6b.  Stones  suitable  for  seals  and  amulets 
were  more  plentiful  in  Elam  than  in  the  Indus  valley. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  16,  no.  17. 

Ihid.,  no.  17. 

Ward,  Seal  Cylinders  of  Western  Asia,  p.  269,  no.  802. 

The  rhinoceros  here  appears  to  have  been  carved  by  someone  who  had  never  actually  seen  this 
animal. 

A cream-coloured  hard  stone  which  cannot  be  scratched  with  a knife.  It  is  possibly  a quartz 
of  some  kind. 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 


145 


1750  B.  c.,  there  was  an  influx  of  peoples  from  the  west  into  Mesopotamia,  and  it  was 
perhaps  about  this  time  that  an  Indian  merchant  had  this  seal  made  in  its  foreign  pattern. 
The  fact,  also,  as  I have  already  shown,  in  Chapter  VII,  that  the  polychrome  pottery  found 
with  these  new  types  of  Indian  seals  and  amulets  has  many  points  in  common  with  certain 
North  Syrian  pottery,^®  despite  the  much  earlier  date  of  the  latter,  might  ultimately  assist 
us  in  the  elucidation  of  the  dark  period  that  followed  the  disappearance  of  the  Harappa 
Culture. 

Seal-amulets  and  Imfressions  of  the  Harappa  Period 

That  seal-amulets  were  manufactured  as  well  as  used  at  Chanhu-daro  is  ^evident  from 
the  number  of  unfinished  specimens  found  at  that  site.  Unfortunately,  owing  to  the  use  of 
a substance  that  appears  to  have  been  powdered  steatite  compressed  into  block  form,  a few 
of  the  seals  were  in  very  bad  condition;  salt  attacks  this  composition  more  readily  than  the 
natural  stone.  Their  fragility  made  it  unsafe  to  take  impressions  of  some  of  them  and  they 
were  accordingly  photographed  direct  (Pi.  LII,  1-6,  1 1).  The  remainder  of  the  seal-amulets 
in  Pis.  LI,  LII  are  full-sized  photographs  of  impressions  in  plasticine. 

The  unfinished  specimens  (Pi.  LI,  i-io)  are  of  particular  interest,  but  whether  seal- 
amulets  were  made  only  for  local  use  or  to  be  traded  over  an  extended  area  it  is  impossible 
as  yet  to  say.  Examination  shows  that  the  engrafing  of  the  animals  and  signs  was  com- 
menced before  the  backs  were  completed,  as  is  seen  in  Pi.  LI,  2,  5,  8 and  other  specimens 
whose  reverses  are  not  illustrated.  The  engraving,  of  course,  was  the  most  difficult  part  of 
making  the  amulet;  its  shaping  and  the  perforation  of  the  boss-like  handle  were  comparatively 
easy.  Yet  accidents  frequently  occurred,  particularly  in  the  preliminary  rough  shaping  of  the 
handles,  and  several  seal-amulets  had  to  be  discarded  for  the  reason  that  the  handle  split 
away  from  the  body  of  the  seal  while  being  shaped.  As  a saw  was  invariably  used  for  this 
purpose  (PI.  LI,  I,  2,  5,  8),  with  teeth  of  a rudimentary  type,*^  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that 
these  accidents  were  frequent,  even  in  working  a homogeneous  stone  like  steatite.  On  two 
of  the  unfinished  amulets  (PI.  LI,  4,  5)  the  handles  were  perforated  before  being  finally 
shaped;  in  others,  such  as  No.  2 in  the  same  plate,  the  making  of  the  hole  was  left  until 
the  engraving  was  done.  In  Nos.  2,6,8, 10  in  Pi.  LI  work  on  the  face  of  the  seal-amulet 
was  well  under  way  before  the  reverse  was  done,  and  in  No.  9 in  the  same  plate,  the 
inscription  had  apparently  been  finished  before  the  animal  was  completed.  The  obverse 
had  already  been  finished  in  Nos.  12,  18,  21,  in  PI.  LI;  whereas  the  handle  of  No.  12  is 
only  a roughly  square,  unperforated  projection  like  that  of  No.  2 in  the  same  plate.  No.  1 8 
w'as  very  nearly  finished  except  that  there  were  saw  marks  at  the  back  to  be  removed,  and  in 
No.  21,  though  the  handle  was  perforated,  the  back  was  unfinished  and  there  was  still 
much  to  be  done. 

As  all  these  seal-amulets  were  made  to  be  carried  on  a cord  at  either  neck  or  wrist. 

The  later  Tell  Halaf  ware. 

Several  saws  have  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  one  at  Chanhu-daro,  for  which  latter  see 
Pis.  LXIII,  I,  LXXIV,  4. 


146 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


their  perforated  handles  often  subsequently  came  awav,  wholly  or  in  part.  Because  of  an 
accident  of  this  hind,  a second  hole  was  made  in  No.  16  in  Pi.  LII— very  carelessly  and 
apparently  by  the  owner.  No.  8 in  Pi.  LII  was  once  the  inscribed  part  of  a square  seal 
from  which  it  had  been  carefully  cut  off,  and  with  the  bach  rounded  it  had  been  put  into 
use  again;  further  damage,  however,  led  to  its  being  thrown  away.  In  its  new  shape  this 
cut-down  seal  resembled  certain  oblong  seals  with  rounded  bachs  that  were  common  at 
Mohenjo-daro  but  have  not  yet  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro.  I should  mention  here  that 
the  square  or  rectangular  copper  tablets  with  an  animal  incised  on  one  side  and  an  inscrip- 
tion on  the  other,  which  are  so  plentiful  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  so  rare  at  Harappa,  have 
also  not  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro;  they  may  have  been  a purely  local  product  of  the 
former  city. 

Before  the  engraving  of  these  seal-amulets  was  commenced  it  is  clear  from  Nos.  3,  5,  8 
in  Pi.  LI  that  the  subject  was  first  roughly  outlined  with  a sharp  point;  but  I confess  I 
can  see  no  sense  in  the  rough  scratches  on  No.  5,  whichever  way  it  is  looked  at,  though  they 
must  have  been  of  some  significance  to  the  engraver.  The  cross  on  No.  3 is  a rough  guide 
rather  than  a drawing,  though  the  engraver  had  used  his  drill  with  some  courage  before 
commencing  the  cutting  of  his  design.  Possibly  this  unfinished  amulet  was  a beginner’s 
trial  piece.  The  obverse  of  No.  8,  a was  nearly  finished,  and  it  shows  that  even  the 
inscriptions  were  planned  out  before  being  engraved  in  order  that  the  characters  might  be 
properly  spaced. 

The  faces  of  the  unfinished  seal-amulets  Nos.  2 and  8 in  Pi.  LI  were  thickly  coated 
with  dark  red  ochre,  and  as  this  colour  appears  on  no  other  part  of  these  two  seals  its 
presence  on  the  obverse  of  each  can  hardly  be  accidental.  Possibly  it  was  used  for  making 
a trial  impression  to  see  how  the  work  was  progressing,  though  the  use  of  colour  for  this 
purpose  would  imply  that  a smooth,  hard  surface  instead  of  some  plastic  material  was 
used  to  receive  the  impression,  which  would  merely  have  shown  the  outline  of  the  body 
and  none  of  the  modelling  of  the  animal. 

No.  4 in  PI.  LI  is  an  irregular  piece  of  dark  grey  steatite,  on  a flat  side  of  which  are 
five  roughly  cut  characters;  it  looks  to  be  a trial  piece  of  an  engraver’s  pupil.  Most  of  the 
amulets  in  Pis.  LI,  LII  are  the  work  of  experienced  craftsmen,  but  it  is  obvious  that  the 
man  or  boy  who  engraved  the  unusually  large  seal-amulet  No.  25  in  PI.  LI  was  far  from 
being  proficient  at  his  work.  The  long  line  of  characters  above  the  animal  is  very  roughly 
cut,  and  even  more  does  the  animal  itself  reveal  an  inexperienced  hand. 

The  one-horned  animal,  or  urus  ox  wdth  which  it  has  been  identified  by  some,  was 
by  far  the  most  favoured  device  on  the  seal-amulets  of  Chanhu-daro.  Out  of  a total  number 
of  55  on  which  animals  appear,  no  less  than  44  picture  this  beast.  It  therefore  occupied  as 
important  a place  in  the  mythology  of  the  people  of  Chanhu-daro  as  it  did  at  Mohenjo-daro 
and  Harappa.  The  cult-object  or  stand  beneath  the  head  of  the  animal  is  the  same,  and 
it  varies  slightly  in  form  as  it  does  on  the  seals  of  these  two  cities.  In  the  particularly 

M.  1.  C.,  pis.  CXVII,  CXVIII;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  XCIII. 

Friederichs,  Der  Alte  Orient,  B,  32,  H.  3/4,  1933. 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 


147 


clear  example  in  Pi.  LI,  33  its  upper  portion  suggests  an  inverted  round-based  basket. 
Other  representations  show  a flat  or  concave  top.  No  really  satisfactory  explanation  of  the 
meaning  or  purpose  of  these  cult-objects  has  yet  been  recorded;  they  have  been  termed 
cages,  racks  for  fodder,  and  stands  on  which  incense  was  burned.  Always  associated  with 
the  one  particular  animal,  this  cult-stand  presents  a problem  which  one  day,  no  doubt,  will 
be  satisfactorily  solved;  on  most  of  the  seals  it  looks  to  have  been  made  of  wicker-  or 
basket-work. 

The  trappings  of  this  ox  are  exactly  the  same  as  those  of  the  animal  on  the  seals 
from  Mohenjo-daro.  What  appears  to  be  a saddle-cloth  thrown  across  the  back  of  the 
animal  in  Pi.  LII,  26  is  a very  unusual  feature;  as  a rule  the  cloth,  if  it  be  a cloth,  was  placed 
across  the  withers.  That  its  unusual  position  on  this  seal-amulet  is  not  an  engraver’s  error 
is  proved  by  its  similar  position  on  a seal  from  Mohenjo-daro. Many  of  the  urus  oxen  also 
have  an  ornamented  collar  round  the  neck  (PI.  LII,  28,  30,  etc.). 

Representations  of  other  animals  on  the  seal-amulets  are  comparatively  rare.  On  four 
the  tiger  is  shown,  but  three  of  these  seals  are,  unfortunately,  badly  mutilated.  On  a 
fragment  of  a seal  (Pi.  LI,  7)  three  of  these  animals  are  joined  together  by  their  middles,  a 
motif  which  is  more  clearly  illustrated  on  a seal  from  Mohenjo-daro,"^  where  it  forms  a 
somewhat  confused  but  nevertheless  very  decorative  pattern.  The  tiger  on  the  broken  seal 
Pi.  LI,  16  may  have  been  the  sole  motif  or  may  have  formed  part  of  a well  known  scene,  of 
which  we  have  a fragment  (PI.  LI,  19),  which  depicts  a man  seated  in  a tree  with  a tiger 
below  looking  up  at  him.  Part  of  a tree  is  clearly  indicated  on  this  seal.^“  On  the  fourth  of 
these  seal-amulets,  which  is  intact  (PI.  LI,  18),  we  see  a man  on  one  knee,  apparently 
invoking  a male  tiger  who  would  seem  to  be  licking  his  face,  perhaps  in  anticipation  of  the 
feast.  Above  is  a tree— most  likely  placed  here  to  show  that  the  man  had  descended  from  it. 
The  figure  carrying  water-jars  suspended  from  a yoke  on  his  shoulders  is  a sign  that  is 
well  known  in  the  Harappa  script;  it  probably  has  no  bearing  on  the  scene  below. 

Three  short-horned  bulls  or  bisons  appear  severally  on  seals  13-15,  17  in  PI.  LI,  asso- 
ciated with  the  manger-like  object  that  with  only  one  or  two  exceptions  always  appears 
with  this  animal  and  which,  as  No.  1 5 shows,  was  made  of  some  kind  of  wickerwork. 
The  trappings  on  the  bull  in  PI.  LI,  1 5 should  not  properly  appear  on  this  kind  of  animal; 
in  all  the  known  seals  from  other  sites  they  appear  to  belong  strictly  to  the  urus  ox  and 
no  other  beast."^  The  bison  on  No.  13  is  trampling  a human  figure  lying  prostrate  on 
the  ground.  This  figure  wears  a very  peculiar  form  of  head-dress,  which  can  just  be  made 
out  at  the  right;  one  arm  and  one  leg  are  raised  as  if  to  fend  the  animal  off. 

The  elephant  in  PI.  LI,  20  was  very  carefully  engraved,  and  the  row  of  bristles  along 
the  back,  indicating  a young  animal,  mark  great  attention  to  realism.  A manger  beneath  the 
head  of  the  animal  on  some  of  the  seals  from  Mohenjo-daro  suggests  that  this  animal  was 
kept  in  captivity. 


F.  E.M.,  pi.  LXXXII,69i. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXII,  386. 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  XCVI,  522. 

The  seals  from  the  site  of  Harappa  have  not  yet  been  published. 


148 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


From  the  set  of  its  horns  the  animal  on  the  seal-amulet  Pi.  LI,  21  is,  I think,  a 
fabulous  animal.  It  has  the  same  shaggy  neck  as  many  of  the  better  hnished  urus  oxen,  and 
apparently  it  is  also  provided  u'ith  a saddle-cloth.  Exactly  the  same  beast  forms  part  of 
a composite  animal  with  three  heads  on  several  seals  from  Mohenjo-daro.^^  The  object 
below  the  head  of  this  animal  is  quite  new  to  us,  yet  bears  a remote  resemblance  to  the 
stands  associated  with  the  urus  bull,  and  like  them  appears  to  be  made  of  basket  work. 
Another  seal  of  interest  is  No.  22  in  PI.  LI.  Here  again  is  the  urus,  with  a human  being 
standing  beneath  its  head.  The  nearest  approach  to  this  scene  appears  on  a seal-amulet  from 
Mohenjo-daro,  where  a tailed  monkey-like  hgure  stands  before  the  animal.'* 

Seal-amulet  No.  23  in  PI.  LI  is  of  interest  on  account  of  its  shape.  Round  seals  are 
especially  noticeable  among  the  square  and  rectangular  seals  that  were  so  popular  in  the 
ancient  Indus  valley.  Of  hundreds  of  seal-amulets  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  a very  small 
proportion  indeed  are  round,  and  the  greater  number  of  these  have  come  from  Sumerian 
sites,  principally  from  Ur.^®  Not  one  of  the  latter  has  an  urus  bull  engraved  on  it,  as  on 
this  seal-amulet. 

The  unfinished  object  Pi.  LI,  6 appears  to  represent  a figure  riding  an  animal;  the 
apparent  rider  is,  however,  a flaw  in  the  stone  and  the  animal  itself  is  incomplete.  The  back 
of  this  object  is  badly  fractured.  It  is  perforated  by  a transverse  hole  from  edge  to  edge. 

With  one  exception,  all  the  seal-amulets  from  Chanhu-daro  were  cut  from  steatite  or 
from  the  artificial  substance  made  from  it  which  has  already  been  mentioned.  Three  seals 
which  are  black  were  once  covered  with  a glossy-white  coating  like  that  often  present  on 
the  seals  from  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa.  The  substance  of  eleven  seals  was  dark  or  light 
grey,  though  they  had  been  whitened  outside  by  the  same  process  as  that  used  with  the 
black  seals.  Of  two  yellow  seals,  one  had  remains  of  this  same  white  coating,  whereas  the 
other,  being  unfinished,  was  in  its  natural  state.  Two  out  of  three  brown  steatite  seals 
also  had  a white  slip,  the  third  being  left  untreated.  One  seal  (PI.  LI,  9)  was  made  of  dark 
grey  stone  with  a gritty  feel,  a most  unusual  material.  The  white  slip  on  similar  seal-amulets 
has  been  examined  by  Mr.  Horace  Beck  and  is  stated  by  him  to  be  an  alkali  fused  by  heat.^’^ 
It  gave  a smooth  glossy  finish  to  the  seals  which  greatly  enhances  their  appearance,  and  it 
has  withstood  the  ravages  of  time  excellently.  Some  of  the  steatite  beads  were  treated  in  the 
same  manner. 

It  is  rare  to  find  a single  sign  as  the  whole  of  the  inscription  above  an  animal,  as 
in  PI.  LI,  31.  I know  of  only  two  examples  among  several  hundreds  of  seals."®  The  sign 
so  employed  appears  on  eight  other  published  seals— both  as  a prefix  and  as  a suffix.  An 
inscription  of  two  characters  is  fairly  common,  but  three  or  more  is  the  rule.  The  diversity 
of  the  characters  on  the  seal-amulets  of  Chanhu-daro  and  elsewhere  implies  that  they  do 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXII,  382;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  XCVI,  494. 

^^F.E.M.,  pl.LXXXVIII,3i6. 

C.  J.  Gadd,  ■'  Seals  of  Ancient  Indian  Style  found  at  Ur,”  Proc.  Brit.  Acad.,  vol.  XVIII,  pp.  3-22. 

Ancient  Egyft  and  the  East,  II,  1934,  pp.  69-83. 

-^F.E.M.,  pis.  LXXXII,  704,  XCVII,  554.  I exclude  the  seals  from  Harappa  which  I have  not 
yet  seen. 


SEALS,  SEAL-AMULETS,  AND  SEAL  IMPRESSIONS 


149 


not  refer  to  the  animal  or  scene  beneath;  it  is  generally  thought  that  they  are  personal  names, 
perhaps  with  titles  appended.  One  new  sign  at  least  occurs  on  the  seals  from  Chanhu-daro; 
namely,  the  first  from  the  right  in  Pi.  LI,  30,  which  appears  to  be  a combination  of  several 
characters. 

The  majority  of  these  seal-amulets  were  found  in  Mound  II  at  levels  ranging  from 
— 5.7  feet  (PI.  LI,  3)  to  as  high  as  +15.4  feet  (Pi.  Eli,  16).  Only  three,  however,  lay 
at  a high  elevation,  namely,  No.  16  in  PI.  LII,  that  of  PI.  LI,  31,  from  + 14.9  feet,  and  the 
unfinished  seal  Pi.  LI,  9,  which  came  from  + 12.2  feet.  Above  these  levels  are  found  most  of 
the  pottery  and  amulets  of  the  Jhukar  Culture.  Only  six  seal-amulets  come  from  the  lower 
levels  of  Mound  II,  namely.  Pis.  LI,  3-5,  LII,  5, 9, 29,  found  at  levels  ranging  from  — 5.7 
to  + 3.8  feet.  But  as  these  low  le\'els  were  only  reached  in  the  trial  trenches  on  the  northern 
side  of  the  mound  and  in  the  Great  Cutting  on  the  South-western  side,  further  deep 
digging  will  doubtless  produce  more.  A few  seal-amulets  were  found  in  the  upper  levels 
+ 13.1  to  -E  16.8  feet  of  Mound  I (Pis.  LI,  10,  25,  LII,  7, 8,  17,  25).  As  yet  only  part  of  the 
summit  of  this  mound  has  been  examined,  and  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  occupied  by 
the  people  of  the  Jhukar  Culture— though  it  is  evident  that  they  visited  it,  for  they  left 
several  objects  behind,  including  the  seal  illustrated  in  PI.  XLIX,  6. 

Clay  and  Faience  Amidets  and  Imfressions 

Clay  or  faience  amulets  or  impressions  of  the  Harappa  Culture  were  distinctly  rare 
at  Chanhu-daro:  only  six  specimens  have  been  found,  one  of  which  we  are  not  able  to 
illustrate  (Pi.  LII,  33-36).  No.  33  is  a direct  photograph  and  slightly  enlarged;  the  actual 
amulet  measures  i .8  x 0.41  x 0.3  inches  and  is  light  red  pottery  with  no  trace  of  a slip.  Both 
faces  are  very  much  rubbed,  as  are  many  of  the  pottery  amulets  from  Mohenjo-daro,  and 
from  certain  marks  on  the  sides  it  would  seem  that  this  article  had  been  made  from  tw'O 
impressed  strips  of  clay  joined  back  to  back.  On  one  side  there  are  in  relief  three  gharials, 
or  fish-eating  crocodiles,  and  two  fishes,  and  on  the  other  a row  of  pictographs,  of  which 
some  are  nearly  illegible.  Cutting.,  locus  469.  Level:  —i.  12 feet. 

No.  34  is  one  of  two  faience  amulets  that  had  been  made  in  the  same  mould.  It  is  of 
cream-coloured  paste  with  light  yellow  patches  on  the  surface,  which  are  probably  the 
remains  of  glaze.  The  back  of  each  one  is  plain  and  neither  had  been  perforated.  The  one 
illustrated  measures  0.75x0.47 X 0.25  inches.  Square  8/P,  locus  182.  Level:  +10. 8 feet. 

No.  3 5 is  a definite  sealing  made  of  drab-coloured  clay  which  owes  its  preservation  to 
hatdng  been  partly  burnt.  Part  of  the  back  is  missing  and  it  is  possible  that  this  is  due  to 
its  having  been  attached  to  a bale  or  document.  It  measures  roughly  0.8  inch  in  diameter 
and  0.31  inch  thick.  The  inscription  upon  it  was  impressed  by  a square  seal.  Square  9/D, 
locus  215.  Level:  +9. 5 feet. 

Another  seal-impression.  Pi.  LII,  36  (see  also  PI.  LXXVII,  i).  averages  1.45  inches 
in  diameter  by  0.61  inch  thick.  The  rounded  back  shows  no  trace  of  ever  having  been 
attached  to  anything.  The  scene  on  its  face  was  impressed  by  a square  seal  measuring 
0.71  X0.71  inches,  and  through  much  use  the  details  are  far  from  sharp;  two  nude  female 


150 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


figures  are  seen,  eacfi  holding  with  one  hand  a standard,  from  which  spring  on  either  side 
two  conventional  branches  terminating  in  pipal  leaves.  The  free  hand  of  each  figure  rests 
on  the  hip,  and  the  general  attitude  somewhat  resembles  that  of  the  bronze  dancing-girl 
found  some  years  ago  at  IVIohenjo-daro.'®  Those  who  hav'e  argued  from  its  style  that  this 
bronze  figure  was  of  later  date  than  the  stratum  in  which  it  was  found  should  be  convinced 
by  the  style  of  this  sealing  that  it  is  in  actual  fact  contemporary.  Cutting,  locus  465.  Level; 
+ I . I feet. 

A clay  sealing  (No.  4170)  which  we  are  not  able  to  illustrate  measured  1.08  inches 
in  diameter  and  had  a slightly  rounded  face  and  back.  On  the  face  was  impressed  a motif 
of  three  animals  tied  together  at  their  middles.  One  of  the  animals  was  a tiger;  the  others 
could  not  be  recognized.  This  three-animal  motif  has  been  found  on  a seal  from  hlohenjo- 
daro,^"  and  something  not  unlike  it  occurs  on  the  fragment  illustrated  in  PI.  LI,  7.  Being 
imperfectly  fired,  this  sealing  dissolved  in  the  water  in  which  it  was  being  cleaned.  Cutting, 
locus  481.  Level:  +0.4  feet. 


M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XCIV,  6. 
^0  M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXII,  386. 


Chapter  X 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIAIALS 

Human  Fimirines 

0 

With  the  possible  exception  of  the  head  in  Pi.  LIII,  1 1,  1 1,  a,  all  the  human  hgurines 
pictured  in  Pis.  LIII  and  LIV  belong  to  the  Harappa  Period;  and  they  were  not  found  at  a 
higher  level  in  Mound  II  than  + 13.5  feet  (Pi.  LIII,  3).  The  possible  e.xception  came  from 
the  comparatively  low  level  of  + 10.4  feet,  and  owing  to  its  technique  and  complete  dissimi- 
larity to  the  other  figurines  I was  inclined  at  first  to  assign  it  to  the  Jhukar  Period,  but  at 
present  I am  not  so  sure.  I have  already  pointed  out  in  various  places  that  objects  of  the 
last  culture  were  quite  often  found  in  the  lower  levels  on  the  sides  of  the  mound,  where 
they  had  rolled  down  in  the  denudation  of  the  site.‘ 

The  figurines  of  Chanhu-daro  are  of  four  types: 

(1).  Hollow  female  figures  with  swollen  bodies  (Pi.  LIII,  1-4,  7),  each  with  a flat  open 
base  upon  which  it  stands  quite  firmly. 

(II).  Solid  seated  figures  with  very  rudimentary  legs  (Pis.  LIII,  5,  i o,  LIV,  1,3,5,8-12), 
nearly  all  of  them  males.  The  lower  parts  of  Nos.  6,  9 in  Pi.  LIII  are  missing,  but 

1 have  no  doubt  that  they  also  belong  to  this  type  of  figurine. 

(III) .  Solid  female  figurine  with  a pan  before  her  containing  a quern  (Pi.  LIII,  13). 

This  little  model  was  probably  a plaything  rather  than  a religious  or  votive  object.^ 
Nos.  8,  12  in  Pi.  LIII  and  Nos.  2, 6, 7 in  PI.  LIV  are  fragments,  I think,  of  similar 
figures. 

(IV) .  Pottery  head  (Pi.  LIII,  1 1 , 1 1 , a)  with  a long  neck  which  evidently  once  fitted  into 

a separate  body,  or  possibly  the  top  of  a support. 

The  figurines  of  Type  I were  fairly  numerous,  though,  being  hollow,  some  of  them 
had  been  smashed  too  badly  to  be  illustrated.  With  their  squat,  swollen  bodies  they  recall 
similar  figurines  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,^  though  they  differ  from  them 
in  standing  upon  flat,  more  or  less  open  bases.  There  is  no  doubt,  I think,  that  the  figurines 
of  this  type  represent  a deity,  possibly  the  Mother-goddess  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and 
other  parts  of  the  ancient  world,  whose  emblem  the  dove  (Pi.  LVII,  6,  12,  1 5,  etc.)  we  have 
found  so  frequently  in  the  Indus  valley  cities.  The  legless  figurines  of  Chanhu-daro  are 

^ This  particular  head  was  unearthed  in  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  238,  and  reference  to  the  plan  in  PI.  Ill  will 
show  its  exact  position.  I base  this  doubt  on  the  resemblance  between  this  head  and  one  from 
Mohenjo-daro;  see  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXVI,  9. 

-A  very  similar  figure  to  this  one  has  been  found  at  Harappa:  Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Surv.  Ini. 
(1926-7),  pi.  XXIII,  c. 

^ M.  I.  C.,  pi.  XCV,  29,  30;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXV,  7, 12, 19. 


152 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


comparable  with  certain  truncated  female  figurines  from  various  prehistoric  sites  in  Northern 
and  Southern  Baluchistan/  which  Sir  Aurel  Stein  has  tentatively  suggested,  on  the  basis 
of  Buddhist  and  Hellenistic  iconography,'  may  represent  an  earth-goddess,  but  personally  I 
would  regard  the  truncation  as  serving  a utilitarian  purpose— figures  so  made  stand 
more  securely  than  those  with  feet,  a most  useful  feature  if  these  figures  were  household 
deities  kept  on  a shelf  or  in  a little  recess  in  the  wall.  A curious  feature  of  some  of  the 
Mother-goddess  figurines  from  Mohenjo-daro  is  that  the  backs  were  left  unfinished,  and 
particularly  their  jewellery,  which  was  shown  only  in  front,  suggesting  that  the  back  of 
the  figure  was  not  intended  to  be  seen.  Some  of  the  figurines  from  Chanhu-daro,  however, 
were  as  well  finished  behind  as  in  front;  for  instance,  the  necklaces  of  Nos.  2, 13  in  PI.  LIII 
were  very  carefully  made  at  the  back,  which  fact  would  suggest  that  they  were  taken  down 
on  certain  occasions  and  placed  in  a position  where  they  could  be  viewed  all  round. 

Whether  these  figurines  were  made  by  a professional  idol-maker  or  were  of  home 
manufacture,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  The  making  of  images  is  a common  profession  in  India 
today,  but  the  figures  are  not  regarded  as  consecrated  until  they  have  undergone  special 
rites  in  the  house  or  shrine  of  their  purchaser. 

Truncated  figurines  have  been  found  in  Elam,  Cyprus,  Crete,  and  elsewhere;  hut  it 
is  not  always  certain  that  their  lower  parts  do  not  represent  long  skirts  covering  the  feet. 
Some  of  the  figurines  of  the  Mother-goddess  from  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  though  of 
a different  type  from  those  now  under  review,  wear  short  skirts;  the  latter  are,  however, 
lacking  in  the  squat,  large-bodied  type  of  figurine  from  Chanhu-daro. 

The  figures  of  Type  II  are  in  every  case  solid,  and  with  few  exceptions  (Pis.  LIII, 
8, 12,  LIV,  6, 7)  are  male.  Some  are  so  coarsely  modelled  that  they  may  well  be  the  work 
of  children,  and  many  have  a peg-hole  in  the  base  suggesting  that  they  were  fastened 
to  something.  At  first  it  seemed  possible  that  these  little  figures  served  as  drivers  for  the 
little  toy  carts  that  were  so  popular  at  Chanhu-daro  (Pi.  LVIII),  but  neither  pin  nor  hole 
to  accommodate  such  figures  has  as  yet  been  found  in  the  sled-like  frames  of  these  carts. 
Certain  of  these  seated  or  kneeling  figures,  noticeably  PI.  LIII,  5, 10,  are  better  made 
than  the  others:  the  attitude  of  No.  10  in  PI.  LIII  even  appears  to  be  one  of  respect  or 
devotion.  The  legs  of  the  very  quaint  figure  No.  5 in  Pi.  LIV  are  intact,  and  from  its  make 
this  figure  looks  to  me  to  have  been  modelled  by  a child. 

I have  included  the  figurines  of  Pis.  LIII,  8, 1 2,  LIV,  2, 6,  7 in  Type  III,  though  the 
legs  are  missing,  for  they  were  undoubtedly  once  seated  figures,  and  the  fact  that  they  are 
all  female  bears  out  this  assumption.  Though  coarsely  made  they  all  show  a certain  amount 
of  childish  attention  to  detail.  Figures  of  this  type  were  also  fairly  common.  The  most 
perfect  is  Pi.  LIII,  13,  a woman  seated  before  a pottery  pan  in  which  is  a quern.  The 
arms  are  missing,  but  the  perfect  example  that  I have  quoted  as  coming  from  the  site  of 
Harappa  shows  them  resting  on  the  upper  stone  of  the  quern.  So  rough  is  the  modelling 
of  this  figure  that  the  legs  have  been  entirely  omitted,  as  they  are  also  in  the  Harappa 
specimen.  The  women  of  the  household  grinding  grain  must  have  been  a familiar  sight 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIMALS 


153 


at  Chanhu-daro,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  children  copied  them  in  the  little  models 
that  they  made. 

The  curious  long-necked  figure  (PL  LIII,  11, 1 1,  a),  which  alone  constitutes  Type  IV, 
was  once  fitted  to  a body,  but  whether  this  was  of  pottery  or  of  some  other  material  is  not 
known.  The  shaven  head,  the  prominent  supra-orhital  ridges,  and  the  large  eyes  and  small 
mouth,  all  suggest  a Sumerian  origin  rather  than  a product  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  The 
nose,  unfortunately,  is  missing  and  there  is  no  means  of  ascertaining  whether  like  those  of 
Sumerian  figures  of  this  date  it  was  represented  as  unduly  large;  from  the  extent  of  the 
broken  surface  I should  say  it  was.  That  a short  heard  is  worn  is  indicated  in  a manner 
which  recalls  the  modern  Sikh  mode  of  wearing  the  beard.  This  head,  which  together  with 
its  neck  is  1.75  inches  high,  has  been  carved  (though  it  is  possible  that  it  was  roughly 
modelled  first)  with  a fairly  broad-edged  tool.  The  neck,  0.45  inch  in  diameter,  has  a 
small  vertical  hole  in  it,  0.14  inch  in  diameter  and  0.53  inch  deep,  which  doubtless  accom- 
modated a peg  to  fasten  it  to  the  body.  The  shape  of  the  head  is  brachycephalic,  but  we 
cannot  accept  this  as  any  indication  of  race,  for  it  is  doubtful  whether  its  carver  purposely 
observed  any  such  distinction;  that  he  purposely  accentuated  the  long  face  and  prognathous 
jaw  seems  evident.  Though  broadly  executed  this  head  has  plenty  of  characterization  and  is 
a valuable  addition  to  what  we  know  of  the  racial  types  of  the  ancient  Indus  valley.  It  is 
impossible  to  say  with  certainty  to  what  period  this  head  belonged.  Found,  as  I have 
said,  at  the  level  of  + 10.4  feet  in  a stratum  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  it  lay  fairly  close  to  the 
edge  of  the  mound  and  might  have  rolled  there  from  a higher  level.  I am  doubtful  if  it 
belongs  to  the  Jhukar  Period,  but,  unfortunately,  we  have  as  yet  no  other  figures  of  that 
culture  with  which  to  compare  it. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  head-dress  of  the  female  figurines  is  the  high  fan-shaped 
affair  so  common  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  but  without  the  curious  pannier-like 
appendages  that  were  so  fashionable.  This  cannot,  however,  be  explained  as  due  to  local 
custom,  for  a mutilated  figure  found  at  Chanhu-daro  in  a preliminary  investigation  had 
worn  this  characteristic  head-dress  of  the  Harappa  Culture.® 

These  fan-shaped  head-dresses  at  Chanhu-daro  were  ornamented  in  various  ways. 
In  Pi.  LIII,  I is  represented  a band  of  material  or  embroidery  which  was  perhaps  studded 
with  sequins  or  other  ornaments.  No.  8 in  Pi.  LIII  had  three  bands  on  the  left  side  and  four 
on  the  right,  one  of  which  alone  was  decorated.  No.  2 in  PI.  LIII  has  six  simple  bands 
on  either  side,  which  it  is  possible,  may  have  represented  long  ropes  of  hair  brought  from 
the  back  of  the  head  to  the  front  over  a framework  of  some  kind.  In  PL  LIV,  4, 4,  a a thick 
strand  of  hair  starting  from  the  top  was  taken  round  the  back  of  the  head  to  the  right- 
hand  side,  being  apparently  held  in  place  by  strips  of  material  passed  round  it  with  the  ends 
secured  by  a medallion  well  above  the  forehead.  One  end  hangs  as  a loop  over  the  left 
temple;  another  which  is  prick-marked  dips  as  far  as  the  neck.  In  Pi.  LIII,  12,  also,  a thick 
strand,  starting  from  the  left  side  of  the  head,  is  brought  round  at  the  back  to  the  right. 

Tight  collars,  worn  by  men  and  women  alike  (Pis.  LIII,  2,  13,  LIV,  10)  appear  to  have 

® Majumdar,  Exflorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXI,  i.  For  a perfect  figure  see  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXV,  21-23. 


154 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


been  made  of  large  beads  strung  closely  together;  but  the  choker  of  the  last-mentioned 
figure  is  more  solid  than  the  others  and  suggests  a metal  original.  Another  figure,  not 
illustrated  (No.  3366),  wears  a similar  collar.  Longer  necklaces,  each  with  a large  pendant, 
are  seen  in  Pi.  LIII,7,  8.  As  is  evident  from  PI.  LIII,  1,3,7,  bangles  were  worn  on  the 
upper  arms  as  well  as  the  wrists;  from  their  great  size  they  were  doubtless  made  of  pottery 
like  the  single  and  multiple  pottery  bangles  that  were  found  in  such  numbers  at  Chanhu- 
daro  (PI.  XC,  26-29, 34)- 

These  pottery  bangles  were  far  from  beautiful  and  must,  I imagine,  have  been  worn 
for  other  reasons  than  mere  decoration.  With  the  exception  of  PI.  LIII,  10,  the  male 
figurines  wear  a simple  string  or  band  round  the  neck,  fastened  in  front  with  the  ends 
hanging  loosely  over  the  chest  (Pi.  LIV,  5,  1 1,  12).  This  same  hand  is  worn  by  many  of  the 
male  figures  from  Mohenjo-daro,  and  it  may  have  been  a sacred  cord  or  a badge  of  office.'^ 

No  clothing  is  worn  by  any  of  the  male  figurines;  this  lack  can  hardly  be  due  to  the 
difficulty  of  representing  a fabric  in  pottery,  for  the  navels  are  always  represented  with  care, 
though  even  light  clothing  would  have  hidden  them.  But  whereas  the  male  figures  of 
Mohenjo-daro  were  always  represented  as  unclothed,  the  women  are  shown  wearing  short 
skirts,  except  those  certain  corpulent  figures  already  stated  to  he  very  like  those  in  PI.  LIII, 
but  with  legs.  It  is  still  a moot  point  whether  these  stout  figures  are  intended  to  suggest 
pregnancy;  if  so,  they  may  have  been  especially  made  as  votive  offerings  and  deposited  in  a 
shrine  for  the  purpose  of  securing  children  or  ensuring  safe  child-birth. 

In  the  female  figures  in  which  the  arms  are  preserved,  the  left  arm  is  held  across  the 
lower  part  of  the  body  while  the  right  is  brought  up  between  the  breasts  or  almost  touches 
the  mouth  (Pi.  LIII,  i,  4,  7).  A variant  position  is  shown  in  PI.  LIII,  3,  where  the  left  arm 
is  held  in  almost  the  same  position  as  the  right,  the  latter  touching  the  mouth.  The 
posture  of  Pi.  LIII,  4 was  perhaps  the  same,  for  though  the  left  arm  is  missing,  it  has  left  its 
impression  behind.  The  same  position  of  the  arms  as  in  Pi.  LIII,  4 has  been  observed  in 
the  stout  figurines  from  Mohenjo-daro.® 

Except  in  the  unusual  head  (PI.  LIII,  1 1, 1 1,  a)  and  one  other  figure  (Pi.  LIV,  9), 
the  eyes  of  both  male  and  female  figurines  are  represented  by  simple  flat  pellets  of  clay, 
more  frequently  than  not  indented  in  the  centre  to  indicate  the  pupil.  In  PI.  LIII,  1 1 the 
sockets  were  deeply  carved  with  a tool;  in  PI.  LIV,  9 they  were  merely  deep  incisions. 
The  nose  was  formed  by  pinching  up  the  clay  with  the  finger  and  thumb,  leaving  two  deep 
hollows  in  which  the  eye  discs  were  placed.® 

Two  holes  indicate  the  nostrils  in  Pi.  LIII,  8.  When  it  is  represented,  the  mouth  is  a 
simple  cut  in  the  clay,  and  we  have  yet  to  find  the  lips  depicted  in  the  strikingly  realistic 
manner  of  certain  figurines  of  Mohenjo-daro.'”  Some  approach  to  this  latter  technique  is  to 
be  seen  in  PI.  LIV,  9,  where  the  mouth  is  an  oval  strip  of  clay,  but  unindented. 

^ F.  E.  M.,  p.  262;  pis.  LXXII,  7,  LXXV,  13,  LXXVI,  15,  22. 

«F.  E.M.,pl.  LXXV,  7,12. 

® The  heads  of  human  figures  were  modelled  in  exactly  the  same  way  by  some  children  in  our 
camp  who  were  given  plasticine  to  play  with. 

10  M.  1.  C.,  pis.  XCIV,  XCV;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXXII,  LXXV,  LXXVI. 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIMALS 


155 


It  is  very  unusual  to  find  the  ears  represented,  as  the  head-dress  generally  covers 
these  features.  Yet  three  of  the  figurines  (Pis.  LIU,  1 2,  LIV,  6,  7)  show  ears,  bored  for 
earrings."  Most  of  the  figurines,  it  is  noteworthy,  appear  to  depict  a young  goddess,  and 
we  do  not  see  the  generous  breasts  that  are  such  a feature  of  the  mature  deities  of  Sumer  and 
further  west;  but  the  pendant  breasts  of  Pis.  LIII,  12,  LIV,  6 are  those  of  aged  people. 
The  navel  was  indicated  in  most  of  the  figurines,  but  the  careful  representation  of  the 
fingers  in  Pi.  LIII,  10  is  most  unusual  at  Chanhu-daro  or  elsewhere.  The  figure  in  Pi.  LIV,  6 
never  had  arms,  but  in  other  figurines  where  these  members  are  missing,  breaks  show  that 
they  once  existed. 

The  clay  used  for  making  these  figurines  was  the  same  as  that  used  for  the  potter/,  and 
in  some  cases  had  a large  proportion  of  lime  and  mica  added.  The  figures  are  light  red  in 
colour  and  save  for  the  occasional  use  of  a cream  slip  are  undecorated  in  any  way.  Nos. 
5,  6,  9,  10  in  PI.  LIII  were  coated  with  a light  or  dark  red  wash  or  slip,  as  are  so  many  of 
the  figurines  of  Mohenjo-daro;  but  possibly  more  were  treated  in  this  way  and  have  lost 
their  colour  in  the  damp  and  salty  soil  of  Chanhu-daro. 

Model  Animals 

The  very  varied  collections  of  model  animals  in  Pis.  LV,  LVI,  LVII  are  with  two 
exceptions  (PI.  LVII,  1,4)  in  potter}^  left  either  a natural  light  red  colour  or  coated  with  a 
cream  or  red-coloured  slip.  A few  of  these  animals  are  ornamented  with  red  lines  to  repre- 
sent hair  or  feathers.  Those  illustrated,  with  the  exception  of  Pi.  LVII,  13,  all  come  from 
Mound  II  between  the  levels  — 12.5  feet  (PL  LVII,  15)  and  + 14.6  feet  (Pi.  LVII,  10,  [4). 
They  therefore  belong  to  the  Harappa  Culture.  But  in  the  Great  Cutting,  in  the  South- 
western side  of  Mound  II,  were  unearthed  four  little  pottery  bulls,  whose  curious  attitude 
and  make  differentiate  them  from  the  other  model  bulls  unearthed  either  at  Chanhu-daro 
or  at  other  Indian  cities  of  contemporary  date.  These  four  little  models  appear  to  have 
been  made  by  another  people  who  may  well  have  been  the  people  of  the  Jhukar  Culture, 
for  comparatively  close  by  them  lay  a finely  painted  headrest  (Pi.  XCII,  38),  which,  by  its 
decoration,  is  safely  assigned  to  this  latter  period  together  with  the  stone  seal  (PI.  L,  4,  4,  a). 

The  most  common  model  animal  at  Chanhu-daro  was  the  humped  bull  (PI.  LV,  2). 
As  a rule  these  bulls  were  coarsely  made,  with  simple  round  clay  pellets  for  eyes,  a pro- 
nounced hump,  long,  rather  thick,  horns  projecting  forwards,  and  fore-legs  and  hind-legs 
joined  together.  This  union  of  the  legs  in  pairs  has  been  noticed  in  the  model  bulls  from 
the  lower  levels  of  Mohenjo-daro,  whereas  the  animals  from  the  upper  levels  invariably  have 
the  legs  separate.^^  Indeed  at  Mohenjo-daro  this  difference  served  approximately  to  date  the 
levels,  and  as  we  suspect  that  Mound  II  of  Chanhu-daro  was  deserted  at  an  earlier  period 
than  Mohenjo-daro,  it  is  possible  that  the  upper  levels  of  the  former  site  are  contemporary 
with  the  lower  levels  of  the  latter  city.  These  model  bulls  with  joined  legs  lend  some 
support  to  this  h^'pothesis. 

Ears  are  rarelv  represented  on  the  clay  figures  of  Mohenjo-daro. 

F.  E.  AL.  p.  288,  pi.  LXXIX,  16,  17,  26. 


156 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Sometimes  the  eyes  of  the  model  hulls,  like  those  of  the  figurines,  are  indented  in 
the  middle  to  represent  the  pupils;  indeed,  one  hull  (No.  902),  which  is  not  illustrated, 
has  its  eyes  represented  hy  tv\'o  strips  of  clay  deeply  enough  indented  to  have  taken  hall-like 
pellets  of  clay.  So  realistic  an  eye  was,  however,  as  rare  at  Chanhu-daro  as  it  was  common  at 
Mohenjo-daro.^^  These  model  hulls— we  have  not  found  any  recognisable  cows— average 
3.5  inches  long,  and  few  are  coloured  red,  as  was  so  often  the  case  at  Alohenjo-daro.  Nostrils 
were  commonly  indicated  hy  holes  and  the  mouth  hy  a shallow  cut. 

Whether  these  hulls  are  all  to  he  regarded  as  toys  it  is  difficult  to  say.  That  a great 
number  were  is  certain,  for  their  shoulders  are  perforated  laterally,  as  is  seen  in  Pi.  LVIII, 
7,  8,  so  that  they  could  be  fitted  as  draught  cattle  to  the  toy  carts  that  were  so  plentiful 
(Pi.  LVIII,  21, 22,  23, 26).  This  again  marks  a difference  between  the  model  bulls  of 
Chanhu-daro  and  those  from  Mohenio-daro.  Though  there  is  no  doubt  that  many  of  the 
model  cattle  from  the  latter  city  belonged  to  toy-carts,  their  shoulders  never  had  holes  to  take 
the  beam  of  a yoke,  as  is  so  often  the  case  at  Chanhu-daro,  where  a much  less  realistic  yoke 
was  required. 

The  model  bulls  are  commonly  not  of  the  Brahmani  type;  they  can  best  be  compared 
with  the  little  grey  cattle  that  trundle  round  in  pairs  in  the  present-day  Sindh  drawing  after 
them  small  carts  with  two  wheels  of  a pattern  that  closely  approximates  to  the  model  carts 
illustrated  in  Pi.  LVIII.  These  modern  Sindhi  cattle  have  their  horns  set  exactly  like  those 
in  PI.  LV,  2,  a small  compact  hump  and  a more  or  less  pronounced  dew-lap,  which  in 
many  of  the  model  animals  from  Chanhu-daro  is  either  merely  indicated  by  roughly 
pinching  together  the  clay  in  front  of  the  shoulders  (Pi.  LVIII,  8)  or  is  absent. 

Quite  possibly  the  head  in  Pi.  LV,  i was  intended  to  represent  a Brahmani  bull, 
which,  though  fairly  common  on  the  seals  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  was  very  rarely  modelled 
in  clay.“  The  head  illustrated  is  that  of  a humped  bull  with  long  crescentic  horns  which 
stand  upright  instead  of  projecting  forward.  This  breed  no  longer  exists  in  Sindh,  though 
it  evidently  did  in  ancient  times. 

The  horn  seen  in  PI.  LV,  6 may  also  have  belonged  to  a model  of  a Brahmani  bull. 
It  measures  2.2  inches  long  by  0.63  inch  in  diameter  at  its  widest  end,  and  is  ornamented  at 
intervals  with  bands  of  dark  red  paint.  A hole,  0.08  inch  in  diameter,  near  the  tip  suggests 
that  a ring  or  similar  ornament  was  once  attached  to  this  horn— a feature  as  yet  unknown 
in  the  veiy^  fine  models  of  bulls  from  Mohenjo-daro;  nor  have  I seen  it  in  modern  India. 
Possibly,  the  bull  to  which  this  horn  once  belonged  was  a cult  image,  of  whieh  many 
examples  have  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  made  of  stone  as  well  as  pottery.^® 
The  bull’s  head  in  Pi.  LV,  7,  of  which  only  the  horns  are  missing,  is  certainly  a cult-object, 
whose  exact  treatment  is  as  yet  unknown.  Certain  bulls’  heads  from  Mohenjo-daro  have  a 
large  hole  in  the  base  of  the  neck  which  it  is  thought  may  have  been  for  fixing  on  a 

M.  1.  C.,  pis.  XCVI,  22, 23,  XCVII,  23, 24, 26;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXXVIII,  i,  LXXIX,  33,  LXXXI, 

I,  I,  a. 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXXXIII,  9,  LXXXVIII,  306,  XCIX  (C). 

These  cult-figures  are  always  of  the  short-homed  bull  and  not  the  Brahmani,  F.  E.  M.,  pi. 
LXXIX,  24,  30. 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIMALS 


157 


ceremonial  staff/®  The  head  from  Chanhu-daro  has  a similar  hole  but  it  is  very  small,  only 
o.  I inch  in  diameter  by  0.72  inch  deep.  Very  possibly  these  pottery  bull’s  heads  were  carried 
in  sacred  procession;  alternately  they  may  have  served  as  an  ornament  of  some  kind,  or  as 
an  amulet  fixed  on  the  wall  of  the  house.  In  the  specimen  under  discussion  the  hole  is 
much  too  small  to  take  a rod  of  any  size,  but  it  would  hav^e  sufficed  to  fasten  the  head  on 
a nail.  The  eyes  are  thick  round  discs  which  are  deeply  incised  in  the  centre.  The  broad 
muzzle  has  two  deep  holes  to  indicate  the  nostrils  and  a shallow  incision  beneath  for  the 
mouth.  Shallow  marks  above  the  eyes  denote  either  wrinkles  or  hair. 

The  four  bulls  in  Pi.  LV,  4,  5, 9, 12  are  especially  interesting;  it  will  be  seen  at  once 
that  they  are  different  from  the  placid  animal.  No.  2 on  the  same  plate.  Their  very  short, 
sturdy  bodies,  their  high  rumps,  and  their  short  projecting  horns,  brought  together  at  the 
tips  in  the  case  of  No.  9,  mark  them  as  an  entirely  different  breed  from  any  other  bull  of 
which  we  have  found  models  on  any  Indus  valley  site.  No.  5 is  exceptionally  interesting 
in  that  its  hump  is  partly  sub-divided  into  two  portions.  Two  of  these  models  have  a thick, 
light  red  burnished  slip  (Pi.  LV,  9, 12),  hut  whether  or  not  to  show  that  the  real  animal 
was  red  in  colour  it  is  difficult  to  say.  A red  wash  or  slip  is  quite  frequently  seen  on  model 
animals  and  figurines  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  but  it  was  rare  at  Chanhu-daro.  Two  of 
these  beasts  have  their  legs  joined  in  pairs,  but  Nos.  9 and  12  have  only  the  front  pair  so 
arranged;  the  hind-legs  are  separate  though  not  well  formed.  Unlike  the  other  model  bulls 
which,  however  roughly  made,  always  have  eyes,  these  four  have  none.  They  were  all 
found  fairly  close  together  in  the  Great  Cutting,  at  not  greatly  different  levels,  and  it  is 
possible  that  they  were  made  by  the  same  man.  Such  spirited  models  were  possibly  intended 
to  represent  fighting  animals,  and  it  may  be  that  bull-fighting  was  one  of  the  sports  of 
Chanhu-daro.  On  a seal  from  Mohenjo-daro  ” a man  appears  to  be  vaulting  over  a bull,  as 
in  the  bull  sports  of  Crete,  and  on  a seal  (Pi.  LI,  13)  of  this  hook,  an  animal,  which  appears 
to  be  a bison,  is  trampling  on  a man,  who  may  he  a competitor.  I have  suggested  that  these 
four  bulls,  all  obviously  of  the  same  date,  should  be  assigned  to  the  Jhukar  Culture— the 
Harappa  Culture  had  no  model  animals  exactly  like  them.  If  bull-fighting  and  vaulting 
were  actually  popular  sports  in  the  Harappa  Culture,  they  may  have  been  acquired  from 
it  by  its  Jhukar  successor. 

In  the  very  interesting  one-horned  animal  (Pis.  LV,  10,  ii,  13-15,  LVI,  2)  the  single 
horn  is  quite  definite,  and  though  in  general  appearance  the  animal  is  not  unlike  the 
so-called  “ one-horned  animal  ” on  the  seals  (Pi.  LI,  26-33),  the  horn,  which  in  only  one 
figure  projects  forward  (Pi.  LV,  1 1),  has  not  the  usual  double  curve.  Mr.  Majumdar,  who 
also  found  a similar  model  in  one  of  his  trial  trenches  at  Chanhu-daro,"®  suggested  that  this 
animal  may  be  the  same  as  that  represented  on  the  seals,  but  further  evidence  makes  this 
unlikely.  These  six  figures  give  me  the  impression  of  being  intended  to  represent  donkeys. 
The  large  ears  of  a donkey,  especially  a young  one,  would  have  very  much  the  same 
appearance  as  the  apparent  horns  of  these  animals,  and  if,  as  is  now  the  Arab  custom,  the 
tips  of  the  ears  were  sewn  together,  the  resemblance  would  be  still  closer. 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  288,  289;  pis.  LXXVIII,  6,  LXXIX,  22, 23. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  337;  pis.  CII,  5,  cm,  8.  Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  38;  pi.  XXI,  4. 


158 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Similar  model  animals  were  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  and  from  the  roughness  of  their 
make  they  all  appear  to  be  the  work  of  children;  the  limitations  of  their  material  perhaps 
made  it  difficult  to  represent  closely  set  horns  or  ears  separately.  No.  10  in  PI.  LV  has  a 
cream-coloured  slip  and  No.  14  red.  All  these  models  have  the  fore-legs  and  hind-legs  joined 
together  in  pairs;  in  Nos.  10,  1 1, 13,  14  of  PL  LV  there  is  a vertical  hole,  averaging  o.i  inch 
in  diameter,  between  the  two  pairs  of  legs,  for  what  reason  it  is  difficult  to  say.  All  have  the 
usual  pellets  for  eyes,  much  exaggerated  in  size  in  No.  1 1 of  PI.  LV. 

The  stripes  of  black  paint  on  the  body  of  No.  3 in  Pi.  LV,  together  with  the  exposed 
teeth,  suggest  that  this  animal  is  a very  rough  model  of  a tiger.  It  is  coated  with  a thick 
red  slip,  two  holes  served  for  nostrils,  and  three  round  pellets  inserted  in  a slit  in  the  clay 
represented  the  teeth.  The  oval  eyes  are  pitted  in  the  centre,  with  incised  eye-lashes  above 
and  below.  Llair  is  represented  by  incisions  between  the  now  partly  missing  ears,  and 
the  wrinkles  above  the  muzzle  are  shown  by  rough  scratches.  There  is  a vertical  hole, 
o.  1 1 inch  in  diameter,  just  behind  the  fore-legs  w'hich  are  separate.  The  tiger,  as  we  know, 
was  familiar  to  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and  it  is  represented  on  four  of  the 
Chanhu-daro  seals  (Pi.  LI,  7,  16,  18,  19).  But  it  was  very  rarely  portrayed  in  clay  and  never 
with  the  same  skill  as  on  the  seals. 

It  is  difficult  to  identify  the  strange  beast  in  Pi.  LV,  8.  Roughly  made  of  pottery  and 
uncoloured,  it  has  a hollow  body,  from  which  the  hind-quarters,  legs,  and  tail  are  now 
missing.  The  head  was  modelled  separately  and  then  attached  to  the  body  by  inserting  a 
long  backward  projection  into  the  open  tubular  trunk;  apparently  the  legs  w'ere  attached  in 
much  the  same  way.  The  badly  mutilated  face  is  human  and  wears  a long,  thin  beard.  On 
the  seals  from  Mohenjo-daro  there  are  representations  of  human-headed  rams,^°  and  it  is 
possible  that  here  we  have  e.xactly  the  same  fabulous  beast.  This  figure  could  hardly 
have  been  used  as  a toy  and  was  probably  a cult  figure. 

What  No.  I in  PI.  LVI  was  intended  to  represent  is  uncertain— possibly  a dog,  for  ears 
were  once  present,  and  no  horns.  Made  of  drab-coloured  pottery,  it  has  divided  legs  and 
uses  round  discs  for  eyes.  Nor  can  No.  3 in  the  same  plate  be  satisfactorily  identified,  for  it 
is  not  known  whether  it  formerly  had  horns  or  ears.  Its  very  rotund  and  roughly  made  body, 
which  seems  to  be  hollow,  is  covered  with  a cream-coloured  slip. 

No.  4 in  Pi.  LVI,  is  undoubtedly  a boar;  the  prominent  ridge  along  the  back  is  a 
characteristic  feature  of  this  animal.  It  has  been  badly  knocked  about  and  part  of  the 
muzzle  is  missing.  Round  pellets  comprise  the  eyes,  and  the  legs  are  joined  in  pairs. 
Indifferently  made,  it  was  covered  with  a thin  cream  slip. 

We  are  also  on  sure  ground  with  Nos.  5 and  6.  Both  are  dogs  as  shown  by  the  tall  prick 
ears,  the  tail  tightly  curled  over  the  back,  while  light  red  spots  are  painted  on  them  both. 
No.  5 has  the  fore-legs  separate;  the  hind-legs  are,  unfortunately,  missing.  A short  cut 
indicates  the  mouth;  the  eyes  are  the  usual  pellets  of  clay;  and  a small  hole  marks  the 
anus.  The  irregular  spots  of  light  red  paint  on  the  body  cannot  be  seen  in  the  photograph. 
No.  6 is  much  the  better  made  of  the  two.  The  eyes  are  more  natural;  two  holes  represent 
the  nostrils;  and  the  spots,  being  in  dark  red,  are  very  distinct. 


M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XII,  18;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  XCIV,  41 1,  XCV,  450,  XCVI,  493. 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIMALS 


159 


Several  breeds  of  dogs  have  been  identified  among  the  models  from  Mohenjo-daro. 
Erom  the  way  they  carry  their  tails,  the  two  illustrated  here  are  of  the  pariah  breed  common 
all  over  India. 

No.  7 in  PI.  LVI  is  a ram’s  head  of  pottery,  which  was  once  inserted  in  a hollow  body 
mounted  on  two  wheels  to  be  drawn  along  as  a plavthing,  as  in  Pi.  LVIII,  nos.  1 1 , 12,  15. 

The  horn  of  the  strange-looking  animal  in  Pi.  LVI,  8 identifies  it  as  a rhinoceros, 
though  this  animal  is  nothing  like  so  realistic  when  modelled  as  when  carved  on  the  seals. 
The  body  is  too  short  and  the  muzzle  too  attenuated.  This  figure  was  evidently  modelled  by 
somebody  who  was  not  well  acquainted  with  the  real  animal;  even  the  horn  is  curved  the 
wrong  way.  A deep  groove  at  the  end  of  the  snout  indicates  the  mouth,  above  which  are 
two  deep  holes  for  the  nostrils.  Despite  its  inaccuracy,  some  care  was  evidently  taken  with 
the  modelling,  though  but  for  the  horn  it  would  be  difficult  to  recognize  it.  It  is  covered 
with  a cream-coloured  slip. 

Models  of  elephants  are  rarely  found  in  the  Indus  valley  sites,  though  this  animal 
frequently  appears  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  seals  (see  also  PI.  LI,  20).  The  figure  that  we 
illustrate  in  PL  LVI,  9 was  a very  welcome  find.  The  short  legs,  spinal  ridge,  and  sloping 
hind-quarters  are  carefully  portrayed,  but  the  trunk  is  much  too  short.  The  vertical  and 
horizontal  red  lines  all  over  the  body  of  this  animal  may  represent  trappings  (or  perhaps  a 
net).  A ring  of  red  round  the  end  of  the  trunk  and  the  painted  line  down  its  front  doubtless 
represent  those  that  are  frequently  seen  on  elephants  when  dressed  for  state  and  festwe 
occasions;  great  ingenuity  is  showm  in  decorating  the  heads  and  trunks  of  the  real  animals 
with  various  patterns  in  coloured  paints. 

No.  3 above  in  the  same  plate  may  also  have  been  intended  for  the  figure  of  an 
elephant.  It  has  no  eyes  and  the  ears  must  have  been  unduly  small. 

No.  10  in  PI.  LVI,  like  No.  7 above  it,  is  a ram’s  head,  formerly  part  of  a toy  like  those 
in  PI.  LVIII.  Red  lines,  now  far  from  clear,  indicate  the  rough  fleece  of  the  animal. 

The  alert-looking  beast.  No.  1 1 in  PI.  LVI,  is  undoubtedly  an  antelope.  The  large 
ears,  one  of  which  is  missing,  are  a feature  rarely  found  on  any  model  of  a horned  animal. 
Both  pairs  of  legs  are  joined,  and  the  body  shows  some  traces  of  red  slip. 

Representations  of  ducks,  in  whatever  medium,  are  very  scarce.  This  bird  appears 
once  among  the  pictographs  on  a seal  from  Mohenjo-daro,‘°  and  a fragment  from  a model 
also  comes  from  that  site.^^  From  its  weight  the  model  bird  shown  in  Pi.  LVI,  12  has  a 
solid  body,  and  it  is  complete  save  for  a small  portion  of  the  bill.  Another  duck  (Pi.  LVII,  2) 
is  more  realistic,  though  more  roughly  modelled;  unfortunately,  the  tail  and  part  of  the 
body  are  missing.  No.  3 in  the  same  plate  has  lost  part  of  the  tail;  it  has  round  pellets  for 
eyes,  and  broad  vertical  red  lines  across  the  back  and  tail  represent  the  plumage.  All  these 
model  ducks  are  legless;  nor  have  they  any  holes  to  attach  them  to  anything.  They  were 
probably  toys,  though  none  of  them  will  float. 

Several  other  model  birds,  too  mutilated  to  photograph,  are  shown  by  their  broad  bills 
to  be  ducks.  Two  of  them  were  roughly  ornamented  with  light  red  lines  to  represent  the 


M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CVI,  93. 


F.  E.M.,  pl.LXXX,  16. 


i6o 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


plumage.  Another,  headless  but  with  a stout  body  like  that  of  the  bird  in  PL  LVI,  1 2, 
was  decorated  in  much  the  same  way. 

The  species  of  bird  in  Pi.  LVII,  4 is  doubtful;  its  beak  and  the  hinder  part  of  the  body 
are  missing.  The  eyes  are  mere  shallow  depressions,  and  incised  lines  roughly  suggest  the 
longer  feathers  of  the  wings.  It  is  an  unfinished  paste  figure. 

No.  8 in  PI.  LVII  is  a very  strange-looking  bird,  made  of  pottery  coated  with  a pink- 
coloured  slip.  One  of  its  legs,  which  w'ere  separate,  is  missing,  and  between  them  is  a hole, 
o.i  inch  in  diameter  and  0.49  inch  deep.  The  eyes,  one  of  which  has  disappeared,  were 
plain  flat  pellets  of  clay  and  the  nostrils  are  marked  by  two  depressions,  below  which  a 
slight  cut  appears  where  should  have  been  the  beak.  On  the  back  of  this  bird  shallow 
incised  lines  represent  the  folds  of  the  wings  across  the  hack. 

The  bird  seen  in  Pi.  LVII,  1 3 has  the  eyes  indicated  by  circular  indentations,  made 
with  a tubular  instrument  so  that  the  cores  represent  the  pupils.  The  badly  broken  wings 
appear  to  have  been  open  and  the  head  was  once  fastened  to  a body  mounted  on  wheels.  A 
portion  of  the  beak  is  missing,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  a small  model  of  a pigeon. 

In  PI.  LVII,  10,  14  is  a bird’s  head,  very  roughly  made  of  pottery,  with  a light  yellow 
slip  roughly  ornamented  with  dark  red  lines;  even  the  eye  is  painted  in  with  this  colour. 
It  doubtless  once  formed  part  of  a chariot,  as  did  also  No.  13  in  the  same  plate  and  the 
ram’s  heads  in  PI.  LVI,  7,  10. 

These  bird-chariots  had  a very  wide  geographical  range.  Specimens  have  been  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa;  they  occur  in  historic  times  in  India,  in  China  just  after 
200  B.  c.,  and  are  known  from  the  Bronze  Age  of  Europe."^  Sometimes  they  have  a ram’s 
head,  like  Nos.  7 and  10  in  Pi.  LVI,  fitted  to  a bird’s  body,  and  they  seem  to  have  been 
used  as  toys,  though  why  they  are  sometimes  of  a composite  nature  is  difficult  to  explain. 
No  complete  specimen  with  a bird’s  head  and  body  has  as  yet  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro, 
though  the  mutilated  specimens  here  described  show  that  they  once  were  made  there. 

The  unfinished  animal  in  Pi.  LVII,  i is  made  of  a white  paste  which  was  never  glazed. 
It  was  intended,  I think,  to  represent  a ram.  The  legs  are  united  in  pairs,  but  it  may  have 
been  intended  to  separate  them  later,  as  the  figure  is  obviously  in  its  hrst  stage. 

Many  roughly  modelled  pottery  figures  were  unearthed,  too  badly  broken  to  make 
satisfactory  illustrations.  One  of  these,  a ram  (2062),  found  at  the  level  —3.8  feet,  came 
from  Trench  G(i),  locus  67.  Another,  also  a ram  C523),  had  its  fore-legs  joined  together, 
but  the  hind-legs  were  missing.  It  was  very  roughly  made,  and  was  taken  from  Trench 
AC3),  locus  40,  at  the  level  — 2.7  feet. 

Nos.  5-7, 9,  1 1,  12,  15  in  PI.  LVII  are  representations  of  doves  with  outstretched  wings, 
all  of  which  have  a vertical  hole  in  the  base  for  fastening  to  something  by  wooden  pins. 
Many  have  unformed  legs,  as  No.  1 1 in  Pi.  LVII,  which  shows  the  appearance  of  the 
reverse  side  of  some  of  these  model  birds.  Sometimes  these  legs  take  the  form  of  flanges  that 
ran  axially  with  the  bodies  of  the  birds,  a feature  which  with  the  hole  between  suggests 
that  they  served  in  some  way,  not  at  all  clear,  to  prevent  these  models  from  twisting  on  the 
stands  to  which  they  appear  to  have  been  attached.  Practically  all  the  specimens  found 

M.  I.  C.,  pp.  560,  561. 


FIGURINES  AND  MODEL  ANIMALS 


i6i 


have  or  have  had  eyes  made  of  round  discs  of  clay.  These  birds  are  frequently  plain;  two, 
not  illustrated,  were  coloured  red.  A few,  like  Nos.  6,  7,  9,  1 1 in  Pi.  LVII,  were  decorated 
roughly  with  red  lines  to  denote  the  plumage,  often  with  a red  ring  round  the  neck  to  show, 
perhaps,  that  they  were  ring-doves.  No.  6 is  unusual  on  account  of  its  slight  crest;  it  also 
has  two  incised  lines  round  the  neck  and  crossed  lines  incised  upon  the  back  to  show  the 
position  of  the  wings. 

Practically  all  these  little  model  doves  are  broken;  they  had  evidently  undergone  hard 
usage,  whether  as  toys  or,  more  probably,  as  cult  objects.  We  know  that  in  Sumer,  Crete, 
Sardinia,  and  elsewhere  the  dove  was  regarded  as  sacred  and  was  dedicated  to  the  Mother- 
goddess,  for  whose  worship  in  the  Indus  valley  cities  also  we  have  strong  evidence. 
Possibly  these  little  models  were  votive  objects  set  in  shrines  of  the  Indian  Mother-goddess, 
either  on  a little  stick  stuck  in  the  ground  or  perhaps  on  a special  stand  like  the  ritual  candles 
of  today,  and  like  most  votive  offerings  were  thrown  out  to  make  place  for  new  ones.  Very 
similar  doves  with  outstretched  wings,  which  stood  on  little  pedestals  attached  to  them,  are 
well  known  from  the  excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,'®  and  birds  of  exactly  the 
same  pattern  have  been  unearthed  at  Kish,  Ur,  and  other  Sumerian  sites,  where  we  know 
a Mother-goddess  was  worshipped.  The  pedestal  type  of  figure  was  as  rare,  however,  at 
Chanhu-daro  as  it  was  common  at  Mohenjo-daro.  On  a figurine  of  the  Mother-goddess  from 
Mohenjo-daro  there  appear  to  be  dove-like  birds  seated  on  her  head-dress,'^  as  in  certain 
Minoan  representations  of  this  goddess.  At  the  present  day  in  India,  a certain  amount  of 
reverence  is  paid  to  the  dove,  especially  among  the  Muhammadans,  but  this  may  be  a 
sundval  of  pre-Islamic  times  when  the  bird  was  the  symbol  of  a Semitic  deity. 

A dove  in  cast  bronze,  which  could  not  he  photographed  before  our  expedition  left 
India,  is  very  like  in  appearance  to  No.  1 5 in  PI.  EVIL  It  measures  i .4  inches  long  and  was 
found  in  Square  9/G,  locus  439,  at  the  level  + 7.5  feet. 


M.  I.  C.,  pi.  XCVI,  i;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXX,  25. 
F.  £.  M.,  p.  280,  pi.  LXXVI,  5. 


Chapter  XI 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS 

Like  the  cities  of  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa,  Chanhu-daro  has  produced  a great 
variety  of  toys  and  playthings.  Evidently  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Period,  like  the  Indians 
of  today,  paid  great  attention  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  younger  population;  and,  though  the 
children  of  the  ancient  Indus  valley  often  amused  themselves  hy  making  their  own  simple 
toys  in  clay,  they  had  many  playthings  that  could  have  been  made  only  by  skilled  craftsmen. 

Toy  Carts 

To  judge  from  the  number  of  wheels  and  broken  frames  that  have  been  found,  toy 
carts  were  extremely  popular  playthings  at  Chanhu-daro.  They  seem  to  have  been  made  as 
easily  as  they  w^ere  broken,  and  fragments  were  brought  in  on  most  days  by  our  workmen, 
though  few  of  the  frames  could  be  put  together  or  even  satisfactorily  restored;  only  two  were 
found  unbroken  (Pi.  LVIII,  19,  21,  22).  Indeed,  the  pieces  were  mostly  so  small  that  one 
can  only  suppose  that  when  the  toys  were  broken  they  were  used  for  other  games  until  they 
became  so  fragmentary  that  all  interest  in  them  was  lost.  Owing  to  their  solid  construction 
the  wheels  had  rarely  suffered  much  damage. 

The  most  usual  cart-frame  was  the  type  illustrated  in  PI.  LVIII,  21.  It  was  strongly 
made  of  pottery  with  four  vertically  pierced  holes  on  each  side  to  take  stakes  of  wood,  exactly 
as  in  the  little  farm  carts  used  at  the  present  day  in  Middle  and  Upper  Sindh.  The  four 
holes  at  the  middle  took  longer  stakes  projecting  from  the  underside  of  the  frame  in  pairs, 
between  which  the  easily  removable  axle  of  the  wheels  was  held.  There  were  also  horizontal 
holes  for  the  shaft  through  one  end  of  the  frame  and  the  middle  cross-piece.  A recon- 
structed cart  of  this  type  is  seen  in  PI.  LVIII,  25,  though  the  wheels  with  it  were  not  found 
with  this  actual  frame.  With  a floor  of  matting  or  a ropework  net,  the  open  frames  of  these 
carts  were  well  adapted  for  carrying  agricultural  produce,  such  as  straw,  hay,  and  the  like, 
which  the  uprights  would  have  kept  in  place.  On  No.  1 8 in  PI.  LVIII  a mesh-work  of  lines 
of  red  paint  indicates  a net  in  position. 

We  now  have  definite  evidence  in  a painted  model  wheel  from  Chanhu-daro  (PI. 
LVIII,  20)  that  the  wheels  used  there  were  even  simpler  in  construction  than  those  used 
in  Sumer  at  the  same  period.  They  were  made  of  three  solid  pieces  of  wood  securely 
fastened  together,  the  projecting  hub  probably  being  one  with  the  middle  plank  of  the 
wheel.  This  three-piece  construction  was  doubtless  necessitated  by  the  impossibility  of 
procuring  planks  of  sufficient  width  for  the  whole  diameter  of  the  wheel.  But  how  the  three 
portions  w'ere  joined  together  our  model  wheel,  being  made  of  pottery,  does  not  show  us. 
Doubtless,  tenons  were  used,  but  alone  these  would  not  have  sufficed  to  hold  the  wheel 
together,  and  lashings  or  battens  of  some  kind  must  also  have  been  employed.  It  should  be 
mentioned  that  the  reverse  of  the  painted  wheel  in  PI.  LVIII,  20  is  flat  and  painted  in  the 
same  manner,  with  the  bands  of  paint  on  the  two  sides  coinciding.  Three  pieces  of  wood 

162 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS  163 

are  to  this  day  used  in  making  the  cart-wheels  of  Sindh,  but  the  wheels  are  perforated  (the 
prototype  of  spokes)  to  make  them  less  heavy  and  iron  bands  reinforce  the  tenons. 

A second  type  of  cart  is  illustrated  in  Pi.  LVIII,  19.  This  is  box-like  in  shape  with  a 
partition  across  the  middle.  At  first  it  was  thought  that  these  miniature  carts  were  dishes  of 
some  kind  which  were  later  converted  to  use  as  toys,  especially  as  the  holes  for  shaft  and 
axles  w'ere  drilled  after  firing  and  not  pushed  through  the  clay  while  still  wet.^  Later, 
however,  it  became  clear  that  these  were  carts  of  another  variety  with  horizontal  and  vertical 
red  lines  painted  on  the  sides  to  represent  either  wickenvork  or  netting;  if  the  latter,  we  shall 
have  to  assume  that  the  sides  of  this  type  of  cart  also  were  not  solid,  and  that  uprights  sup- 
ported netting  as  in  the  already  described  models,  e.  g..  Pi.  LVIII,  25." 

A second  cart  of  this  type  (No.  4071),  which  is  not  illustrated,  has  almost  the  same 
size  and  shape  and  is  similiarly  decorated,  except  that  the  painted  lines  are  horizontal  and 
oblique.  The  holes  to  take  the  axle-pegs  are  o.  1 5 inch  in  diameter;  and  the  shaft-hole, 
which  is  very  irregular  and  0.31  by  0.2  inches  in  size,  appears  to  have  been  altered  after 
the  first  boring  so  as  to  make  tbe  shaft  more  horizontal.  In  this  second  model,  too,  the  base 
is  flat  and  a thick  deposit  of  sand  and  mica  shows  that  it  had  been  laid  to  dry  on  a sand  bed. 
It  comes  from  Sq.  7/F,  locus  298,  level  + 6.7  feet. 

A little  cart  body  of  much  the  same  type  (Pi.  LVIII,  14)  also  had  a hole  for  a shaft 
and  four  pins  to  hold  the  axle  in  place.  It  is,  however,  unpainted,  and  had  evidently  been 
discarded  because  badly  over-fired  in  the  kiln. 

A third  type  of  frame  (Pi.  LVIII,  22,  26)  was  even  more  like  the  modern  carts  of 
Sindh.  A hole  for  the  shaft  pierced  the  frame  longitudinally  and  in  the  better-made 
examples  there  were  holes  for  uprights  along  both  the  longer  sides.  No.  4 in  Pi.  LVIII  has 
slightly  raised  sides,  approximating  to  the  box  pattern,  and  for  this  reason  perhaps  there  are 
no  holes  for  uprights,  but  only  four  for  the  axle  ties. 

Nos.  5,  6,  10  in  the  same  plate  are  probably  some  form  of  bird  or  animal  chariot. 
A considerable  number  were  found,  but  in  every  case  they  were  badly  broken.  The  turned- 
up  end  is  complete  in  No.  5 only,  and  probably  represents  the  tail  of  a bird  or  other  animal. 
That  there  was  a head  on  this  type  of  chariot  is  indicated  by  the  fracture  that  is  always 
present  at  the  forward  end,  but  up  to  tbe  present,  curiously  enough,  we  have  found  no 
heads  that  could  have  belonged  to  these  particular  chariots.  But  a number  of  heads  have 
been  found,  e.  g.,  No.  16  in  PI.  LVdll,  that  without  doubt  came  from  tbe  animal  bodies  on 
wheels.  Nos.  1 1,  12,  15  in  the  same  plate. 

Yet  a fourth  type  of  toy  cart  or  chariot  frame  is  shown  in  PI.  LVIII,  9,  1 3.  Unlike  those 
already  described,  these  carts  had  four  wTeels,  and  the  canopy-like  arrangement  in  front 
was  in  the  real  cart  obviously  intended  to  shield  the  driver.  No  four-wheeled  carts  or 
chariots  have  yet  appeared  at  Alohenjo-daro  or  Harappa,  but  they  are  well  known  at  some  of 
the  Sumerian  sites  contemporary'  with  the  Harappa  Culture.^ 

^ The  two  wheels  with  this  particular  cart  were  found  with  it. 

“The  sides  of  certain  model  vehicles  from  Northern  Mesopotamia  are  painted  in  the  same  way: 
Speiser,  Excavations  at  T epe  Gawra,  p.  75,  pi.  XXXV,  a. 

® Mackay,  Anthropology  Memoirs,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  vol.  I,  p.  21 1,  pi.  XLVI. 


164 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


A specimen,  also  in  potter)%  is  also  known  from  Anau/  Another  four-wheeled  cart 
(No.  4686),  with  the  same  shield-like  canopy,  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro,  seems  like  No.  9 
in  Pi.  LVIII  to  have  had  wheels  of  larger  diameter  in  front  than  behind,  a very  unusual 
feature  in  the  ancient  toy  vehicles  of  any  country'. 

As  we  know  that  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  were  w'ell  acquainted  with  the 
Sumerians,  it  is  not  surprising  that  both  two-wheeled  and  four-wheeled  vehicles  were  in 
use  in  both  countries,  but  where  the  wheeled  cart  was  originally  invented  it  is  not  so  easy 
to  say.  From  the  model  carts  and  chariots  found  at  Sumerian  sites  and  their  representations 
in  relief  and  mosaic,  we  can  say  that  the  P’pe  of  chariot  used  in  Sumer  was  definitely  less 
primitive  than  anything  yet  found  in  ancient  India. 

The  dearth  of  war-like  weapons  in  the  cities  of  the  Harappa  Culture  has  led  to  the 
belief  by  many  that  the  Indus  valley  in  ancient  days  was  not  troubled  as  was  Sumer  by 
inter-racial  feuds,  and  that  the  inhabitants  had  no  enemies  of  importance  to  fear.  But  the 
shield-like  fronts  of  the  chariots  shown  in  PI.  LVIII,  9,  13— obviously  intended  to  protect 
the  driver— do  certainly  suggest  something  in  the  nature  of  a vehicle  used  in  warfare,  unless 
as  seems  a reasonable  explanation,  they  were  simply  for  protection  against  mud  or  dust 
thrown  up  by  the  animals  that  drew  them.  Before  any  decision  can  be  reached  in  this 
matter,  we  must  find  specimens  that  are  better  finished  and  unbroken. 

We  were  fortunate  in  finding  two  toy  carts  made  of  metal,  presumably  bronze,  not 
copper,  in  place  of  the  usual  potter}'.  The  first  (Pi.  LVIII,  1,2)  is  only  2.93  inches  long, 
1.2  inches  wide,  and  1.75  inches  high,  and  is  nearly  perfect,  save  that  the  front  of  the 
cart  (facing  right  in  No.  i),  which  was  originally  in  the  same  line  as  the  rest,  had  been 
bent  upwards.  There  are  also  fragments  missing  from  the  rear  of  the  cart.  Its  frame 
resembles  No.  21  in  Pi.  LVIII,  save  for  having  six  cross-bars  instead  of  three.  The  man 
seated  in  front  holds  a stick  in  his  right  hand,  and  before  the  frame  was  bent  did  not 
occupy  the  restful  position  in  w'hich  he  now  appears  to  recline.  The  sides  of  this  cart 
consist  of  an  upper  and  lower  bar  connected  by  uprights  at  each  end,  and  differ  in  this 
respect  from  the  more  usual  type.  The  wheels,  0.93  inch  in  diameter  and  0.09  inch  thick, 
are  solid  and  lack  the  projecting  hub  of  some  of  the  pottery  wheels  (Pi.  LVIII,  3,  20). 
The  shaft,  unfortunately  broken  in  the  model,  ran  under  the  cross-bars  instead  of  through 
them,  as  was  probably  the  case  in  the  actual  carts  of  the  period;  this  arrangement  with  the 
necessary  fixtures  could  not  be  copied  conveniently  in  making  the  pottery  toys.  The  wheels 
are  now  immovable,  but  they  must  originally  have  revolved  in  two  axle-brackets  cast  in 
one  with  the  frame.  When  the  metal  of  which  this  model  is  made  can  be  analyzed,  it  will, 
no  doubt,  be  found  to  be  an  alloy. 

The  figure  of  the  driver  is  too  corroded  to  show  what  garments  he  is  wearing.  He  sits 
on  one  of  the  cross  members  of  the  frame  with  his  feet  on  what  is  left  of  the  shaft. 

The  other  metal  vehicle  found  (PI.  LVIII,  2)  is  of  quite  a different  pattern;  in  some 
respects  it  resembles  the  “ ekka  ” of  modern  India.  Its  present  height  is  2.4  inches,  its 

* Pumpelly,  Exflorations  in  Turkestan,  pi.  47,  fig.  ii.  See  also  the  representations  of  the  four- 
wheeled  wagons  of  Ur  in  Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  pi.  92. 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS 


165 


length  1. 7 1 inches,  and  width  i.i  inches.  The  under-frame  was  originally  2.13  inches  long 
by  0.9  inch  wide,  and  was  curved  and  had  four  cross-bars  instead  of  the  three  that  appear 
in  the  pottery  frames  (PI.  LVIII,  21).  Each  side  has  crossed  struts  between  supports  at 
each  end  for  a pent-roof.  From  the  way  in  which  it  was  strengthened  by  cross-pieces,  the 
latter  appears  to  have  been  a wooden  frame  covered  over  with  a lighter  material,  such  as 
matting  or  cloth.  A transverse  cross-bar  at  each  end  of  the  cart  kept  the  canopy  supports 
upright.  This  little  model  also  is  slightly  bent,  probably  by  earth  pressure.  It  now  has 
no  shaft,  and  the  eyelets,  with  holes  0.14  inch  in  diameter,  through  which  the  axle  passed, 
are  bent  towards  one  another  so  that  they  touch. 

An  almost  similar  toy  was  found  by  Mr.  AI.  S.  Vats  at  Harappa  some  years  ago.'*  It  also 
has  a canopy  and  sides  strengthened  by  cross-members  .set  on  an  open  frame;  indeed,  it 
differs  from  the  Chanhu-daro  vehicle  only  in  having  a driver,  very  like  the  little  figure  seen 
in  PI.  LVIII,  I . The  distance  of  Harappa  from  Chanhu-daro  is  well  over  400  miles,  and  the 
close  resemblance  between  model  carts  found  in  these  two  cities  so  widely  separated  argues 
a wide-spread  and  homogeneous  culture  in  those  days. 

From  these  little  model  carts  we  can  visualize  the  actual  vehicles  that  took  people  to 
and  fro  between  the  cities  and  the  various  ferries  across  the  river,  and  most  likely  in  the 
evenings  carried  people  to  pleasure  resorts  outside  their  cities;  in  fact,  which  served  all  the 
purposes  of  the  “ tonga  ” and  the  “ ekka  ” of  the  present  day. 

Wheels 

The  pottery  wheels  of  the  toy  carts  were  of  three  main  types.  Nos.  3,  20  in  PI.  LVIII 
show  the  most  common  form,  with  a pronounced  hub  on  one  side,  which  was  either  roughly 
moulded  with  the  fingers  or  finished  off  with  a sharp  instrument  to  obtain  a better  shape. 
In  another  type  (PI.  LVIII,  23)  the  hub  is  not  emphasized,  both  sides  of  the  wheel  being 
markedly  convex.  In  the  third  type  (Pi.  LVIII,  24,  25),  the  wheel  is  plane  on  both  sides 
and  frequently  covered  with  a thick  deposit  of  sand  and  mica,  showing  that  these  objects 
had  been  shaped  or  laid  to  dry  on  a sand  bed.  These  potter)'  wheels  vary  greatly  in  size, 
ranging  from  just  over  an  inch  to  as  much  as  4.5  inches  in  diameter  and  averaging  0.5 
inch  in  thickness,  including  the  hub.  They  are  frequently  very  much  out  of  shape  and  the 
holes  in  many  are  acentric. 

That  the  animals  drawing  these  model  carts  were  humped  oxen  is  suggested  by  the 
large  number  of  model  oxen  that  were  found,  each  with  a hole  through  the  shoulders 
(Pi.  LVIII,  7,  8)  to  take  one  end  of  a yoke  (Pi.  LVIII,  22).  Possibly  the  ass  also  was  used 
for  this  purpose,  as  we  know  was  the  case  in  Sumer.®  The  ox,  howe\'er,  makes  a very 
good  draught  animal;  it  can  travel  a considerable  distance  at  a quick  trot. 

Animal  Figures  on  Wheels 

The  three  ram  chariots  (Pi.  LVIII,  ii,  12,  15)  are  typical  of  many  that  have  been 
found  at  Chanhu-daro,  but  nearly  always  badly  mutilated.  Their  hollow  bodies  were  very 

® Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Sun’,  hid.,  1926-27,  pi.  XXIII,  fig.  d.,  p.  105. 

^ AI.  Hilzheimer,  “ The  Evolution  of  the  Domestic  Horse,”  Antiquity,  vol.  IX,  p.  133. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


1 66 

liable  to  break,  and  the  heads  which  were  added  to  the  bodies  by  the  insertion  of  a long 
prolongation  of  the  neck  (PI.  LVIII,  i6)  frequently  came  away  at  the  joint.  The  heads 
which  are  undamaged  all  have  the  tightly  curled  horns  of  a ram,  and  the  bodies  are 
invariably  decorated  with  crossed  red  lines  which  presumably  represent  the  fleece.  These 
not  very  realistic  bodies  are  nearly  always  triangular  in  cross  section,  with  the  base,  front, 
and  back  quite  flat;  and  there  is  rarely  a tail.  That  these  objects  were  toys  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  most  of  them  have  a hole  through  the  neck  to  take  a cord  for  pulling.  Though 
there  were  also  chariots  with  bird’s  heads,  none  were  found  unbroken;  two  such  heads  are 
seen  in  PI.  LVII,  lo,  13,  14. 

A few  of  the  model  rams  have  a normal  ram’s  body,  but  the  legs  are  joined  together 
in  pairs,  like  those  of  the  model  oxen.  Lateral  holes  through  the  joined  legs  show  these 
toys  to  have  been  mounted  on  four  wheels.  Unfortunately,  all  the  toy  rams  of  this  group 
were  too  mutilated  to  be  photographed. 

The  long-necked  creature.  No.  17  in  PI.  LVIII,  was  also  once  mounted  on  four 
wheels,  but  what  animal  it  represents  it  is  difficult  to  say.  It  has  minute,  round  discs  for 
eyes,  and  a fracture  on  the  forehead  suggests  that  it  had  once  a single  horn  here.  In  the 
narrow  vertical  slits  on  either  side  of  this  fracture,  ears  of  some  other  material  may  hav^e  been 
inserted.  The  long  neck  is  encircled  with  bands  of  dark  red  paint,  and  there  are  two  red 
bands  across  the  withers,  others  round  the  middle,  and  six  across  the  hind-quarters.  The 
very  short  legs  are  joined  in  pairs,  pierced  laterally  by  holes,  o.  1 7 inch  in  diameter,  for  the 
axles  of  the  wheels.  A small  lateral  hole  through  the  neck  just  below  the  muzzle  evidently 
took  a draw-string. 

Bull  with  Moveable  Head 

The  bull  with  moveable  head  in  Pi.  LIX,  i was  not  found  complete  as  photographed. 
It  is  a somewhat  rare  toy  and  only  a few  were  found  at  Alohenjo-daro.^  The  head,  hinged 
on  a wooden  pin  which  passed  through  projections  on  either  side  of  the  neck,  was  moved  by 
a cord  or  piece  of  fibre  threaded  through  holes  in  the  shoulders,  hump,  and  hind-quarters. 
Experiment  has  shown  that  a piece  of  stiff  fibre  works  the  head  better  than  a loose  cord, 
which  is  apt  to  stick  in  the  three  holes. 

Figure  with  Moveable  Arms 

The  potter)^  figure  in  No.  2 of  Pi.  LIX  once  had  mo\'eable  arms  suspended  on  a 
wooden  pin  passed  through  a hole,  o.ii  inch  in  diameter,  in  the  shoulders.  The  head  and 
lower  part  of  the  legs  are  missing,  but  a similar  figure,  almost  perfect,  found  at  Mohenjo- 
daro  has  a monkey  s head  from  which  the  ears  are  missing.®  The  head  of  a third  such 
figure  found  in  a later  season  has  two  long  upright  ears,  which  belong  to  a quite  different 
animal.  No.  2 in  PI.  LIX,  like  most  such  figures,  has  a very  prominent  abdomen,  but 
that  this  was  not  meant  to  suggest  pregnancy  is  proved  by  the  male  organs  on  our  Chanhu- 

^ M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CLIII,  39;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXXI,  10. 

« M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CLlll,  38. 

» F.  E.  M.,  pi.  LXXXI,  8. 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS 


167 


daro  figure.  An  irregular  dark  red  band  round  the  broken  neck  of  this  figure  represents  a 
necklace  or  collar. 

Whistles 

A very  favourite  toy  at  Chanbu-daro  was  a pottery  whistle  in  the  shape  of  a hen, 
invariably  set  on  a little  pedestal  with  a hollow  base.  These  whistles  have  been  found  in 
large  numbers  at  the  other  Indus  valley  sites.  Though  sometimes  left  unornamented,  they 
are  more  frequently  decorated  with  coarse  red  lines  to  represent  the  feathers  (No.  6 in 
PI.  LIX).  There  is  always  a hole,  averaging  0.2  inch  in  diameter,  in  the  back  just  in 
front  of  the  tail,  and  by  blowing  into  this  a shrill  sound  can  be  produced.  These  bird-shaped 
whistles  average  2.29  inches  high.  Some  have  a red  line  round  the  neck  suggesting  a collar, 
and  one  imperfect  specimen  (No.  1623)  has  a collar  made  of  a strip  of  clay. 

Another  form  of  whistle  (PI.  LIX,  18-20)  is  a little  hollow  pottery  vessel  with  a 
rounded  or  slightly  pointed  base,  and  a circular  or  irregularly-shaped  aperture  at  the  top, 
varjung  from  0.19  to  0.46  inch  in  diameter;  there  is  also  a smaller  hole  in  the  middle  of 
the  side  (No.  18)  or  close  to  the  top  (No.  19).  Experiment  has  shown  that  various 
modulations  of  sound  can  be  produced  by  using  the  finger  on  the  smaller  hole  when 
blowing  flute-fashion  into  the  large  one  at  the  top.  These  objects  do  not  vary  much  in 
size;  they  average  1.7  inches  high.  Only  two  were  decorated;  one  with  a red  band  painted 
round  the  upper  hole  (No.  3879),  and  on  the  second  (No.  910)  were  traces  of  red  lines 
round  the  body.  These  whistles  must  definitely  be  assigned  to  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Rattles 

Nos.  7-10  in  Pi.  LIX  and  1-7  in  PI.  LXI  are  rattles,  made  of  potter)'  and  ornamented 
with  lines  of  red  paint.  A very  large  number  were  found,  especially  in  the  lower  levels  of 
Mound  II,  where  they  had  rolled  down  from  above.  Though  hollow,  they  are  very  rarely 
found  broken.  Similar  toys  from  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa  are  not  so  carefully  decorated 
as  those  from  Chanhu-daro;  broken  specimens  from  the  former  site  show  that  they  were 
made  by  wrapping  the  clay  round  a combustible  core  of  some  kind,  which  disappeared 
except  for  a small  amount  of  ash  when  the  rattle  was  baked.  Two  or  three  irregular 
pellets  of  clay  were  found  in  some  of  the  rattles  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  doubtless  thev  exist 
in  those  from  Chanhu-daro  also.  A great  deal  of  attention  was  paid  to  the  decoration  of 
these  playthings,  though  in  some  cases  the  paint  was  applied  directlv  to  the  potterv'  surface 
without  an  intervening  slip.  These  rattles  range  in  size  from  an  exceptionally  small  speci- 
men, 0.7  inch  in  diameter,  to  2.5  inches  in  diameter,  with  an  average  of  1.8  inches. 
As  the  illustrations  in  Pi.  LXI  show,  the  patterns  on  them  are  ver)'  diverse,  the  most 
frequent  ornamentation  being  three  or  four,  or  even  five  circles  (Nos.  7,  9)  around  a large 
spot  with  the  intervening  intervals  filled  in  with  parallel  curved  lines  (Pis.  LIX,  7-9,  LXI, 
1-4,  6,  7).  The  surface  of  one  rattle  was  quartered  by  two  lines  at  right  angles  to  one 
another  (Pi.  LXI,  5).  A few  of  these  toys  were  undecorated,  but  possibly  the  paint  had 
disappeared.  Nos.  9 and  10  in  Pi.  LIX  were  found  together. 


i68 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Marbles 

A considerable  number  of  pottery  marbles,  like  those  illustrated  in  the  upper 
register  of  No.  ii,  and  No.  12,  Pi.  LIX,  were  found  in  the  lower  levels  of  Cbanbu-daro, 
whither  many  of  them  had  rolled  down  from  higher  up  the  mound.  Most  are  made  of 
pottery,  some  beautifully  rounded,  but  others  far  from  accurate;  and  they  range  in  size  from 
0.8  to  1.9  inches  in  diameter.  It  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  all  these  little  balls  were 
playthings.  Some  could  have  been  used  as  missiles  with  a sling  or  a sling-bow,  a weapon 
that  is  commonly  used  in  Sindh  at  the  present  day.  Others,  however,  are  roughly  decorated 
with  red  spots  (Pi.  LIX,  No.  ii,  upper  register),  and  it  is  clear  that  this  trouble  would 
not  have  been  taken  with  them  unless  they  had  been  used  in  a game. 

A certain  number  of  balls  of  flinty  limestone  (Pi.  LIX,  3)  are  white,  cream,  or  light 
grey  in  colour,  some  beautifully  made  and  others  far  from  round.  It  would  seem  that  the 
natural  nodules  commonly  found  in  limestone  formations  were  used  for  making  them,  being 
rubbed  down  to  the  requisite  size  and  shape.  These  stone  balls  hav^e  a greater  range  of  size 
than  the  pottery  ones.  The  largest  was  2.4  inches  in  diameter  and  the  smallest  i . i inches. 
More  rarely,  marbles  were  made  of  a softer  limestone,  light  yellow  in  colour;  others  were 
of  harder  stones,  but  many  of  these  were  not  particularly  well  finished  and  do  not  come 
up  to  the  standard  of  the  finely  made  articles  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  of  which  some  of 
those  made  of  the  rarer  stones  are  beautifully  finished  and  polished.  A shell  marble  (No. 
3823),  0.89  inch  in  diameter,  is  not  well  finished. 

Five  balls,  made  of  a white  paste  bearing  traces  of  glaze  whose  colour  had  disappeared 
except  on  one  which  is  light  green,  were  found  in  the  higher  levels  of  Mounds  I and  II  and 
may  have  been  products  of  the  Jhukar  Culture.  The  smallest  was  only  0.4  inch  in  diameter 
and  the  largest  0.89  inch,  and  none  was  perfectly  round. 

A faience  marble.  No.  13  in  Pi.  LIX,  is  pitted  all  over  with  little  incised  circles  0.12 
inch  in  diameter;  and  another.  Pi.  LIX,  4,  made  of  pottery  is  similarly  decorated. 

The  rather  larger  pottery  balls  in  Pi.  LIX,  16,  17,  23,  24  were  perhaps  used  for 
throwing.  The  first  and  last  were  found  together,  and  bear  all  over  the  imprints  of  a finger- 
or  thumb-nail.  No.  23,  which  is  fragmentary,  has  a number  of  carefully  impressed  circles 
upon  it,  and  No.  17  has  been  incised  with  a semi-circular  edge. 

The  two  large  balls  in  Pi.  LIX,  14,  15  are  of  shell,  having  concentric  circles  incised 
on  six  sides  with  their  edges  nearly  meeting.  This  type  of  ball  is  already  well  known  from 
Mohenjo-daro,  where  specimens  were  also  made  of  shell  and,  more  rarely,  of  faience. 
It  is  thought  that  the  circles  were  once  filled  in  flush  with  the  face  with  a coloured  paste. 
The  sizes  of  these  marbles,  for  such  they  seem  to  be,  were  limited  by  the  size  of  the 
columella  of  the  shell  from  which  they  were  cut,  and  the  larger  of  the  two  illustrated— 
the  only  two  yet  found  at  Chanhu-daro— is  1.3  inches  in  diameter. 

Three  pellets  (PI.  LIX,  ii,  lower  register),  each  with  a groove  incised  round  the 
equator,  are  difficult  to  explain.  Quite  a few  hav^e  been  found,  all  treated  in  the  same  way. 
The  groove  suggests  that  a cord  was  tied  round  them,  and  I can  only  suggest  that  they  were 
net-sinkers  of  some  kind  or  else  were  used  as  bolas  balls  against  very  small  game.  They 
could  also,  I imagine,  have  been  employed  with  a bow,  the  string  fitting  into  the  groove 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS  169 

round  the  pellet,  but  the  balls  used  in  Sindh  today  are  held  in  place  by  a pocket  of 
leather  or  cloth. 

Gamesmen 

Gaming  pieces,  particularly  of  the  type  seen  in  PL  LIX,  25-27,  28-30,  and  Pi.  LX,  6, 
were  fairly  common.  Mostly  made  of  pottery  but  very  rarely  coated  with  a slip,  they  are 
four-sided,  pyramidal  in  shape,  with  rounded  angles  and  points.  I do  not  think  they  were 
used  on  a board.  They  might  have  been  tossed  up  and  received  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  as 
in  the  game  similar  to  “ jackstones  ” that  is  played  in  most  parts  of  the  world  and  is  especially 
popular  in  India.  In  fact,  these  little  pieces,  are  not  unlike  certain  seeds  that  are  used  in 
play  at  the  present  day.  They  average  in  size  0.55  inch  across  each  of  the  four  sides.  Three 
of  these  objects  were  found  together  with  a fourth  piece  of  irregular  shape  (No.  4208), 
the  four  seeming  to  form  a set;  two  of  these  were  light  red  and  the  third  and  fourth  made 
of  a greyish  clay.  All  these  gamesmen  belong  to  the  Harappa  Culture. 

Sir  Leonard  Woolley  has  found  gaming  pieces  of  exactly  similar  shape  in  the  Royal 
Cemetery  at  Ur,  but  made  of  lapis-lazuli  or  shell,  and  decorated  at  the  points  with  inlay. 
Four  were  found  together  and  it  was  assumed  that  two  of  the  set  had  been  lost.  In  view, 
however,  of  the  group  of  four  just  mentioned  from  Chanhu-daro,  this  may  have  been  the 
accustomed  number  for  a set.^“ 

Other,  and  some  of  them  more  usual,  types  of  gamesmen  are  illustrated  in  PL  LX,  1-5, 
7-1 1.  Of  especial  interest  is  No.  7,  which  is  most  beautifully  and  regularly  made  of  faience 
and  is  now  light  blue.  The  corners  of  this  piece  are  very  slightly  rounded  but  the  edges  are 
sharp.  Evidently  nearly  new,  this  piece  is  little  worn.  This  tetrahedral  gamesman  is  of  a 
shape  known,  though  it  is  comparatively  rare,  at  Mohenjo-daro,  where  also  it  was  most 
commonly  made  of  faience. “ One  made  in  bronze  has  also  been  found  in  the  latter  site.^^ 
The  type  is  also  well  known  at  some  of  the  Sumerian  sites,  though  made  of  stone. 
Gamesmen  of  exactly  similar  shape  have  been  found  in  Palestine,  but  dated  there  to  a much 
later  period  (c.  1500-1230  b.c.).^^ 

No.  4 in  PL  LX  is  a curiously  shaped  object  which  was  made  from  a part  of  one  of  the 
excrescences  on  the  outside  of  a sahkha  shell.  It  was  very  carefully  cut  and  polished,  and  is 
more  likely  to  have  been  a gaming-piece  than  anything  else.  Perhaps  the  faience  object  of 
similar  shape  in  PL  LXXXIX,  i was  also  a gamesman. 

A well-made  piece.  No.  8 in  PL  LX,  1.5  inches  high  and  of  faience,  now  cream- 
coloured,  is  of  a type  well  known  in  other  parts  of  the  ancient  world.  Similar  pieces  to 
No.  9 in  the  same  plate,  which  is  made  of  a hard  black  stone,  also  occur  at  Mohenjo-daro 
and  Harappa.  This  last  was  found  together  with  a roughly  made  potter)^  piece  (No.  4431), 

The  Royal  Cemetery,  p.  279,  pi.  95. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CLIII,  40,  41;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXLII,  64,  73,  74. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  572;  pis.  CXXXIX,  1 1,  CXLII,  63. 

Hamilton,  Quarterly  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities  in  Palestine,  vol.  IV,  pi.  XXXV.  And  see 
also  W.  F.  Albright,  “ A Set  of  Egyptian  Playing  Pieces  and  Dice  from  Palestine,”  Mizraim,  vol.  I, 
pp.  1 30- 1 34,  pi.  XIV. 


17° 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


which  is  a roundel  with  a fairly  flat  top  and  base.  No.  lo  is  a simple  faience  piece,  now 
cream-coloured,  which  still  bears  traces  of  glaze;  and  No.  1 1 , made  of  the  same  material, 
now  light  grey,  has  a depression  in  its  top,  in  which  there  was  formerly  set  a piece  of  inlay, 
but  of  what  material  we  do  not  know,  though  it  w'as  probably  a paste  of  a different  colour. 

Nos.  21,  22,  31,  32,  38,  39  in  PL  LIX  are  either  counters  or  draughtsmen.  All  except 
two  are  pottery  sherds  which  have  been  roughly  rounded  by  chipping.  No.  32  is  square 
and  plaque-like,  and  is  made  of  a drab-coloured  clay  that  was  insufficiently  burnt.  At  one 
time  it  was  thought  to  be  a weight  ( 1 5.070  grammes),  but  its  material  makes  it  more  likely 
to  have  been  a draughtsman.  No.  39,  which  is  1.83  inches  in  diameter,  is  also  of  pottery; 
its  smooth  surface  and  edges  suggest  that  it  was  used  in  a board-game. 

Except  for  the  pyramidal  gamesman  which  were  found  in  plenty  and  were,  as  we  think, 
used  without  a board,  and  certain  bobbin-like  pieces  to  be  referred  to  later,  the  number  of 
gamesmen  found  at  Chanhu-daro  was  small.  Possibly  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  had  little 
time  for  board-games  and  similar  diversions  as  compared  with  the  wealthier  and  probably 
more  leisured  inhabitants  of  the  larger  cities  of  the  Indus  valley. 

Knuckle-hones 

On  PI.  LIX,  37,  43  are  two  knuckle-bones  which  were  probably  used  in  the  same 
way  as  the  little  pottery  pyramids  already  described.  The  larger  bone,  which  is  1.28  inches 
long,  was  found  in  one  of  the  Harappa  levels  and  is  polished  by  much  use.  The  smaller 
is  very  badly  weathered  and  was  unearthed  at  a high  level.  It  may  belong  to  the  Jhukar 
Period  or  to  even  later  times. 

Bohhin-like  Objects 

Nos.  33-36,  40-42  in  PI.  LIX  and  Nos.  13-15,  17-20  in  Pi.  LX  are  very  puzzling. 
Large  numbers  of  them  have  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  both  in  the  upper  levels  and  in 
the  lower,  whither  they  had  rolled.  They  are  of  three  types: 

(a)  Almost  cylindrical,  with  flat  or  rounded  ends  (PI.  LX,  15). 

(b)  Hour-glass  shape  with  rounded  ends  (PI.  LX,  17,  19). 

(c)  Hour-glass  shape,  one  or  both  ends  flattened  (PI.  LX,  13,  14,  18,  20). 

They  vary  much  in  size  as  well  as  shape.  The  largest  found  is  1.8  inches  long  and 
the  smallest  0.38  inch. 

These  objects  are  generally  roughly  made  of  either  drab-coloured  or  grey  clay.  Few 
of  them  will  stand  upright,  and  most  are  perforated  longitudinally  by  a small  hole  that 
may  have  been  made  with  a thorn;  but  this  hole  is  sometimes  very  oblique  or  penetrates  a 
very  short  distance. 

I have  provisionally  identified  these  objects  as  used  in  a game,  though  how  they  were 
used  is  a matter  of  surmise.  Certainly  not  on  a board,  as  few  w'ill  stand,  but  perhaps  in 
holes  scooped  in  the  ground.  Another  possible  explanation  is  that  they  were  bobbins  used 
in  some  way  in  weaving  and  that  something  was  fixed  in  the  holes  by  which  to  suspend 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS 


171 

them.  Nos.  40-42  in  Pi.  LIX  could  have  held  a fair  quantity  of  thread,  but  not  so  with 
Nos.  33-36.  The  ends  of  No.  42  in  Pi.  LIX  are  concave. 

Nothing  resembling  these  objects  has  turned  up  at  iMohenjo-daro.  At  Chanhu-daro 
they  were  first  unearthed  in  the  upper  levels  of  Mound  II  in  considerable  numbers.  Lower 
down  they  became  fewer  and  fewer  as  the  buildings  of  the  Harappa  Period  were  cleared, 
and  such  specimens  as  were  found  came  from  the  edges  of  the  mound.  I am,  therefore, 
quite  confident  that  these  bobbins  or  playthings  were  products  of  the  Jhukar  Culture. 

Dice 

Many  little  slips  of  ivory  found  at  Mohenjo-daro  appear  from  the  marks  upon  them  to 
have  been  used  as  dice,”  whereas  others  were  gaming  pieces.  At  Chanhu-daro  only  two 
dice  have  as  yet  been  found,  and  both  were  too  badly  broken  to  be  photographed.  The 
first  (Pi.  LX,  12)  is  estimated  to  have  been  1.8  inches  long,  with  a rectangular  section 
measuring  0.27  X 0.32  inches.  Made  of  ivory,  now  deep  brown  in  colour,  it  shows  the 
polish  of  much  use.  On  one  side  are  two  longitudinal  grooves,  on  two  sides  circles,  each 
with  a central  dot,  at  each  end,  and  the  remaining  side  plain.  As  one  end  of  this  die  is 
missing,  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  blank  side  had  a circle  on  it  or  not. 

On  the  two  opposite  sides  of  the  second  die  (Pi.  LX,  16)  two  groov'es  ran  along  its 
length.  On  one  end  of  each  of  the  other  two  sides  two  concentric  circles  were  incised. 
This  die  also  had  a portion  missing  from  one  end,  and  there  may  originally  hav^e  been  other 
circles  now  missing.  It  has  been  badly  damaged  by  fire. 

Cones 

The  cones  illustrated  in  Pis.  LX,  21-39  ^nd  LXXXVIII,  4 are  included  in  this  chapter 
as  there  is  a possibility  that  they  were  used  in  a game  or  amusement  of  some  kind,  despite  the 
fact  that  in  Sumer  cones  similar  in  shape  to  Nos.  35-39  were  used  in  large  numbers  to 
decorate  walls.  Potter)^  cones  were  inserted  in  mud-brick  walls  as  far  as  their  broader  ends, 
which  were  painted  in  various  colours.  This  mode  of  decoration  was  particularly  well 
developed  at  Uruk,  where  columned  walls  are  covered  with  a mosaic  of  pottety"  cones  in 
black,  white,  and  red.”  In  the  Indus  valley,  however,  they  could  not  have  been  used  for 
this  purpose:  for  one  thing,  the  sides  of  the  cones  are  frequently  decorated,  either  with 
paint  or  incised  markings,  which  would  have  been  hidden  by  insertion  in  a wall.  Moreover, 
both  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Chanhu-daro  they  have  been  found  in  comparatively  small 
numbers,  and  made  of  shell  as  well  as  potterjc  It  has  been  suggested  that  these  cones,  or 
at  least  some  of  them,  were  lingams;  but  personally  I do  not  think  this  was  so,  even  though 
lingam  worship  appears  to  have  been  practised  in  the  Indus  cities,  as  at  the  present  day 
in  India. 

The  cones  from  Chanhu-daro  fall  into  the  following  groups : 

AI.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXXII;  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXLIII,  18-54. 

Jordan,  Ahhandlungen  der  Preiissichen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.  Phil.-Hist.  Klasse 
QAusgrahungen  in  Uruk-Warka^,  1929,  7;  1930,  4;  1932,  6.  Also  see  Woolley,  The  Developnent  of 
Sumerian  Art,  Chap.  I. 


172 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(a)  Squat  type,  with  flat  base  (Pis.  LX,  21-23,  LXXXVIII,  4). 

(b)  Long  conical  type  with  flat  base  (Pis.  LX,  24-26,  29-31,  34-37>  39)- 

(c}  Long  conical  type  with  projection  in  the  centre  of  the  flat  base  (Pi.  LX, 
27,  32,  33>  38)- 

(d)  Long  conical  type  with  rounded  base  (Pi.  LX,  28). 

Only  four  of  Type  (a)  have  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro,  though  they  were  common 
at  Mohenjo-daro.  They  are  solidly  made,  with  broad  bases  on  which  they  can  stand  without 
rocking.  No.  21,  of  pottety^  coated  with  a dark  browm  slip,  is  now  1.62  inches  high.  Two 
deep  grooves  ornament  its  base.  No.  22,  also  of  pottery,  has  a purplish-black  slip  applied 
over  a red  slip."®  To  a height  of  1.02  inches,  the  lower  part  of  this  cone  is  ornamented  with 
a scored  spiral  line,  a very  usual  feature  in  this  type  of  cone.  There  is  also  a conical  hole, 
0.2  inch  in  diameter  and  0.45  inch  deep,  in  the  centre  of  the  otherwise  flat  base.  No.  23 
has  a dark  red  slip,  but  is  otherwise  unornamented,  and  it  stands  well  on  its  substantial 
base.  The  points  of  all  these  three  cones  w’ere  broken  off  or  otherwise  damaged,  as  is  the 
case  with  nearly  all  the  similar  cones  at  Mohenjo-daro,  a condition  that  has  never  been 
satisfactorily  explained.  If  they  had  been  lingams,  one  would  expect  more  care  to  have 
been  taken  of  them,  with  more  surviving  unbroken.  If,  however,  they  were  used  in  some 
kind  of  game,  damage  of  this  kind  w'ould  have  to  be  expected. 

No.  4 in  Pi.  LXXXVIII  is  1.2  inches  high.  It  is  of  plain  pottery  and  may  be  a large 
gamesman.  The  small  truncated  cone  in  PI.  XXIX,  63  measures  1.02  inches  high  and  i.o 
inch  in  diameter.  In  the  top  of  this  object  is  a hole,  not  central,  0.09  inch  in  diameter 
and  0.12  inch  deep.  Two  vertical  holes  opposite  one  another  in  the  sides  of  this  cone  look 
as  if  they  had  been  pierced  with  a thorn.  Square  9/C,  locus  208,  level:  + 6.9  feet. 

The  long  conical  Type  (b)  is  that  most  frequently  found.  The  flat  bases  of  these 
specimens  (Pi.  LX,  24-26,  etc.),  however,  do  not  always  enable  them  to  stand  securely,  for 
often  the  base  is  far  from  regular  and  the  cone  is  inclined  to  wobble.  No.  24  in  Pi.  LX  is 
made  of  shell,  and  was  found  with  the  very  elaborate  cone  No.  30.  It  was  cut  from  the 
columella  of  a large  shell,  and  the  spiral  line  round  it  was  not  artifically  incised  but  is  part  of 
the  natural  twist  of  the  shell.  The  pottery  cone.  No.  25,  once  had  a red  slip,  and  is  excep- 
tionally well  made,  with  a smooth  and  almost  polished  surface.  Its  uneven  base  barely  allows 
it  to  stand  alone.  No.  26,  which  cannot  stand  at  all,  is  made  of  pottery  coated  with  a 
cream-coloured  wash.  No.  29,  also  made  of  potter)'  but  without  a slip,  once  had  a sharper 
point  than  it  now  possesses;  the  present  one  shows  signs  of  having  been  rubbed  down. 
Nos.  30  and  31  are  e.xceptionally  fine  cones,  both  made  of  shell;  and  each  has  a pattern 
incised  immediately  above  the  base,  which  w'as  once  filled  in  with  a black  pigment.  No.  30 
stands  well.  No.  3 1 with  difficulty.  The  tip  of  the  latter  is  chipped  and  had  apparently  been 
rubbed  into  shape  again.  No  cones  like  these  two  last  are  known  from  j\Iohenjo-daro. 
No.  34  is  of  pottery,  with  five  broad  red  bands  roughly  painted  on  its  natural  surface. 
It  stands  very  unsteadily. 

Both  No.  35,  which  is  a w'ell  made  pottery  cone,  and  No.  36  rest  with  ease  on  their 
These  two  slips  are  frequently  found  together  on  the  pottery  of  the  Harappa  Culture. 


TOYS  AND  PLAYTHINGS 


173 


flat  bases.  The  latter,  which  is  made  of  shell,  had  been  accidentally  burnt  and  blackened 
No.  37,  also  made  of  shell,  has  lost  its  point,  but  stands  well.  The  tip  of  the  pottery  cone 
No.  39  is  missing.  This  was  very  carefully  made  and  decorated  with  narrow  lines  of  red 
paint  on  a semi-polished  surface. 

Type  (c)  (PI.  LX,  Nos.  27,  32,  33,  38)  was  nicknamed  “ carrot  ” by  the  diggers. 
They  are  all  pottery  and  carefully  made;  only  Nos.  27  and  33  will  stand,  and  that  with 
difficulty.  Each  has  a more  or  less  roughly  finished  projection  at  the  base.  No.  27  is  pottery 
with  no  slip.  No.  32  also.  The  latter,  however,  shows  signs  of  accidental  burning,  and  a 
white  substance  which  superficially  resembles  gypsum  and  needs  further  examination  had 
been  inset  in  its  base.  No.  33  is  drab-coloured  pottery,  very  hard  baked,  its  tip  is  missing. 
This  cone,  which  will  only  just  stand  upright,  is  ornamented  with  four  lines  of  pricking,  a 
form  of  decoration  which  also  occurs  on  similar  cones  from  Mohenjo-daro.  It  also  has  a 
shallow  hole  in  the  base.  No.  38,  of  pottery,  is  covered  with  a dark-grey  slip.  Its  point  is 
missing,  and  it  has  a very  slight  projection  at  the  base. 

Type  (d)  is  illustrated  by  only  one  cone.  No.  28  in  Pi.  LX;  it  has  a rounded  base; 
is  unbroken,  and  was  either  made  of  grey-coloured  clay  or  is  coated  with  a grey  slip. 

From  these  brief  observations  it  will  be  noted  how  few  of  the  points  of  these  cones  are 
unbroken,  and  how  few  of  them  wall  stand  securely  on  their  bases.  If  they  were  used  in 
some  form  of  game— perhaps  to  be  knocked  down  by  the  little  pottery  balls  frequently 
found  at  Chanhu-daro— their  unsteady  stance  would  have  added  to  their  value.  But  if  they 
were  so  used,  they  would,  more  likely  than  not,  have  been  set  on  dusty  ground,  in  which 
case  they  would  readily  stand  whether  their  bases  w'ere  even  or  not.  That  they  experienced 
rough  treatment  is  obvious.  I see  no  reason  to  believe  that  they  were  votive  offerings. 


Chapter  XII 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 

OBJECTS  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 

Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro  yielded  a large  quantity  of  tools  and  implements,  both  of 
copper  and  bronze.  Altogether  four  large  hoards,  containing  from  sixteen  to  twenty-eight 
objects  each,  were  unearthed  and,  in  addition  to  these,  a number  of  smaller  deposits  of 
over  six  objects  each  were  also  discovered.  All  these  groups  save  one  came  from  le\'els 
ranging  from  9.1  to  10.4  feet  above  datum,  and  must,  therefore,  be  assigned  to  the  Harappa 
II  Period.  The  exception  was  the  large  hoard  No.  2199,  which  was  found  at  the  level 
E 1 1.3  feet,  and  so  belongs  to  the  Harappa  I occupation  above. 

It  is  not  possible  to  say  at  present  how  many  of  these  objects  are  of  bronze  and  how 
many  of  copper,  for  no  analyses  of  them  have  yet  been  made,  although  a quantitative 
spectographic  analysis  of  those  received  by  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  is  to  be  made  by 
Mr.  William  J.  Young  of  the  Museum  staff  for  future  publication.  Bronze  was,  however, 
almost  as  common  as  copper  in  the  lowest  levels  of  Mohenjo-daro,  and  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe  that  at  Chanhu-daro  the  same  proportions  will  hold  good. 

The  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  may  have  obtained  their  copper  either  in  India 
itself  but  more  likely  from  sources  outside  that  country.  Baluchistan,  Afghanistan,  and 
Persia  have  all  been  mentioned  as  possible  fields  of  supply.^  The  writer  for  several  reasons 
would  favour  Persia,  for  both  tin  and  copper  ores  occur  plentifully  in  that  countr)'.  Tin  is 
rare  in  India;  nowhere  has  it  been  found  in  workable  and  commercial  quantities.'  There  is 
a large  source  of  supply  in  Burma  and  the  Malay  Peninsula,  but  these  must  be  ruled  out 
as  far  as  the  Harappa  Civilization  is  concerned.  Tin  is,  however,  known  in  North-eastern 
Persia  and,  as  Dr.  Lucas  has  shown,  that  country  is  also  rich  in  copper  ores.® 

It  may  have  been  the  occurrence  of  tin  and  copper  in  close  proximity,  as  for  instance, 
in  Persia,  that  led  to  the  discover)'  of  bronze  by  the  accidental  mixing  of  the  two  metals.’ 
Alloys  from  Mohenjo-daro  have  been  found  to  contain  as  much  as  26.9%  of  tin  and,  when 
thirty-one  fragments  of  bronze  from  that  site  yielding  2%  and  upwards  of  the  metal  were 
examined,  the  average  proportions  of  tin  to  copper  was  found  to  be  as  high  as  1 1.91%.®  The 
percentage,  however,  varied  so  much  for  individual  specimens  that  it  was  obvious  that  the 
mixing  of  the  two  metals  was  performed  in  a most  perfunctory  manner.®  A greater  propor- 
tion of  tin  would  naturally  he  required  in  tools  used  for  heavy  work  and  for  intricate  castings, 

^ See  Sir  Edwin  Pascoe  in  M.  1.  C.,  p.  676. 

^ Op.  cit.,  p.  682. 

^ journ.  Eg.  Arch.,  May  1928,  pp.  97-108. 

^ Lucas  concludes  that  this  was  so;  ihid.,  p.  108. 

^ From  analyses  made  by  Dr.  C.  H.  Desch  and  Khan  Bahadur  Mohammed  Sana  Ullah;  M.  I.  C., 
pp.  484,  486,  487;  F.  E.  M.,  pp.  479-482. 

‘^This  variation  also  occurs  in  Egyptian  bronzes.  See  Lucas,  Ancient  Egyptian  Materials,  p.  235. 


174 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


175 


though  hronze  containing  a high  percentage  of  tin  is  hardly  suited  to  the  making  of  wrought 
utensils  owing  to  its  brittleness/ 

The  same  high  tin  value  has  also  been  noticed  in  bronzes  unearthed  by  Sir  Aurel  Stein 
in  Southern  Baluchistan.  A sample  from  Zangian-damb  contained  23.  i % of  tin,  and  a vessel 
from  Catti  no  less  than  27%  of  tin.®  Both  sites  appear  to  be  of  later  date  than  the 
Harappa  Culture. 

Up  to  the  present  time  only  negligible  quantities  of  copper  ore  have  been  found  in 
the  excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro  ® and  none  at  all  at  Chanhu-daro.  Samples  of  tin  ore  of 
any  kind  that  could  have  been  used  in  the  local  preparation  of  bronze  were  absent  on 
both  these  sites.  It  appears  likely,  therefore,  that  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  had  to 
use  their  bronze  in  the  state  in  which  it  was  brought  to  them  and  that  they  had  no  sure 
means  of  ascertaining,  except  in  the  roughest  manner,  its  tin  content.  In  any  case  it  would 
have  been  impossible  for  them  to  regulate  the  proportions  of  tin  and  copper  unless  they 
obtained  the  two  metals  separately.  It  would  seem  that  the  bronze  was  not  prepared  in  India 
but  brought  in  from  outside  in  the  form  of  ingots  and  the  smelters,  whoev^er  they  were, 
were  in  the  habit  of  mixing  the  two  metals  somewhat  indiscriminately.  These  smelters  had 
probably  no  experience  in  working  up  the  bronzes  to  their  final  forms  and,  in  turn,  the 
coppersmiths  who  converted  this  material  into  useful  forms  in  all  probability  knew  nothing 
about  smelting.^® 

If  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Civilization  originally  came  from  the  west,  as  many  people 
now  think,  they  may  quite  possibly  have  continued  to  obtain  their  supplies  of  copper  and 
bronze  from  the  place  where  they  originally  procured  it  and  thus  maintained  trade 
connections  by  land  or  by  sea  with  their  old  home. 

Most  of  the  copper  and  bronze  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  came  from  Squares  8/B, 
8/C,  and  9/C  (see  Pi.  IV).  These  areas  probably  represented  the  quarter  of  the  city 
inhabited  by  the  metal  workers,  for  unfinished  castings  as  well  as  an  ingot  were  discovered 
in  several  of  the  hoards  (Pis.  LXV,  9,  LXVIII,  4,  5,  LXXIV,  2,  16,  LXXV,  4).  The  contents 
of  every  collection,  large  and  small,  were  all  carefully  cleaned  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Archaeological  Chemist  in  India. 

The  largest  deposit  (No.  2529)  contained  thirty-seven  pieces  in  all  and  came  from 
Square  8/C,  locus  297,  at  the  level  -f  10.4  feet.  The  action  of  the  salt  in  the  soil  had 
cemented  together  all  the  objects  it  contained  and  some  of  the  objects  in  this  group  were 
in  too  bad  a state  of  preservation  to  be  illustrated.  Pis.  LXII,  1-23,  LXIII,  1-5,  and  LXXIV, 
2-9,  however,  all  show  specimens  from  this  most  instructive  hoard. 

No.  2593,  whose  condition  when  unearthed  is  shown  in  Pi.  LXXIV,  1 5,  comes  next  in 
importance  and  was  found  in  Square  9/C,  locus  212,  at  the  level  +9.1  feet.  After  it  had 
been  cleaned  it  was  possible  to  pick  out  the  fine  objects  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXIV,  i-ii, 
LXV,  1-9,  LXVI,  1-5,  LXXIV,  10-17. 

’ What  is  known  as  a full  bronze  mixture  contains  10%  of  tin. 

® From  analyses  made  by  Dr.  Desch. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  41. 

It  was  perhaps  more  economical  to  smelt  the  ores  at  their  sources  of  supply,  as  was  done  in 
Sinai  and  Eastern  Palestine. 


176 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


If  the  number  of  objects  contained  in  each  board  be  taken  into  account,  No.  2199 
must  be  mentioned  next.  The  specimens  shown  in  Pis.  LXVI,  6-21  and  LXXV,  1 1-13  came 
from  this  collection,  which  was  discovered  in  Square  9/C,  locus  227.  The  high  level 
(+  1 1.3  feet)  at  which  they  were  found  makes  it  impossible  to  date  them  earlier  than  the 
Harappa  I occupation. 

The  fourth  large  hoard  (No.  2365)  found  in  Square  8/B,  locus  284,  at  the  level 
+ 9.5  feet,  is  shown  in  PI.  LXXV,  i,  exactly  as  it  was  when  first  uncovered.  Its  contents, 
after  cleaning,  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXVIII,  1-16  and  LXXV,  1-9. 

Other  and  smaller  groups  were  discovered  at  var^'ing  levels  all  over  Mound  II,  and 
some  of  these  were  undoubtedly  the  private  property  of  the  occupants  of  the  various  houses 
and  rooms  that  were  cleared.  These  collections,  which  usually  consisted  of  small  objects, 
such  as  razors,  pins,  small  knives,  and  the  ubiquitous  chisel,  were  sometimes  found  stored 
in  pottery  vessels.  The  bangle,  chisel,  and  axes  in  Pis.  LXIX,  i i-i  5 and  LXXVI,  5, 6,  were 
preserved  in  this  way,  together  with  a skull  and  a large  shell. The  large  pan  in  PL  XXIX, 
37  contained  quite  a collection  of  copper  and  bronze  objects,  most  of  which  are  to  be  seen 
in  Pis.  LXVII,  1-12  and  LXXIV,  i,  la.  All  these  objects  are  naturally  in  a far  better  state 
than  those  which  were  found  embedded  in  the  soil. 

It  is  not  proposed,  however,  to  describe  the  contents  of  these  hoards  of  metal  piece  by 
piece,  as  objects  similar  in  type  to  them  have,  in  many  cases,  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro.'^ 
Only  specimens  which  are  new  to  us  or  present  features  of  especial  interest  will,  therefore, 
be  mentioned  here,  but  all  the  objects  illustrated  are  tabulated  in  the  Catalogue  preceding 
the  plates,  where  particulars  are  given  of  their  position  at  the  site  and  the  levels  where  they 
were  found. 

Copper  and  Bronze  Utensils  (Pis.  LXll,  1-4,8, 10,  LX1V,§),  LXVI,  i,y,  12,  LXVII,  2, 
LXVIII,  1-3,  LXIX,  3,  LXXIII,  34,35, 37-39,  LXXIV,  2, 10,  LXXV,  1-3,7,10, 
14-16,  LXXVI,  2,32) 

Although  so  simple  in  form.  No.  i in  PI.  LXVIII  (see  also  PI.  LXXV,  2)  is  a type  of 
jar  that  has  not  yet  appeared  at  Mohenjo-daro.  Its  surface  is  too  encrusted,  however,  for 
us  to  tell  whether  it  is  of  beaten  work  or  was  cast.  The  dish  in  PI.  LXXIII,  35  was  certainly 
cast  in  bronze  and  is  of  unusual  weight  for  its  size. 

No.  37  in  the  same  plate  (see  also  Pi.  LXXV,  1 5)  was  found  in  a sadly  battered  state. 
This  copper  canister  is  fitted  with  wire  loop  handles,  the  ends  of  which  have  been  passed 
through  two  holes  on  either  side  and  then  bent  up  against  the  inner  walls.  The  wire  used 
for  this  purpose  is  also  of  copper  and  measures  0.12  inch  in  diameter.  Apart  from  the  pans 
described  below,  this  is  the  only  example  of  a handled  metal  vessel  belonging  to  the  Harappa 
Culture  which  has  so  far  come  to  light. 

The  handled  pans  in  Pis.  LXVI,  i,  LXVIII,  2,  LXIX,  3,  LXXV,  7,  LXXVI,  2 are  types 
of  vessels  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro.  They  are  simply  constructed  of  one  piece,  the 

“ For  the  pottery  vessel  see  PI.  XXIV,  4.  The  skull  is  fully  described  in  Chapter  XVI. 

These  are  dealt  with  fully  in  the  reports  on  Mohenjo-daro. 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSIES 


177 


handle  being  formed  by  bending  the  metal  over  or  under  in  tubular  fashion,  with  the  edges 
meeting  closely/^  No.  i in  Pi.  EXVI  has  a slightly  oval  dish,  measuring  4.02  by  3.8  inches 
inside.  No.  3 in  PI.  LXIX  is  shown  again  in  photograph  in  Pi.  EXXVI,  2.  These  pans  were 
certainly  used  for  frj'ing  and  resemble  our  modern  utensils  to  a remarkable  degree. 

The  fine  bowl,  No.  38  in  Pi.  LXXIII  (see  again  PI.  LXXV,  16),  was  raised  from  a piece 
of  sheet  copper  and  is  of  entirely  new  shape,  although  slightly  distorted  by  earth  pressure. 

The  fluted  cosmetic  jar  in  Pi.  EXXIII,  39  and  EXXVI,  32  is,  of  course,  a casting  and  is 
perfect  except  for  a small  portion  missing  from  the  base.  The  latter  is  slightly  conv^ex  so  that 
the  vessel  does  not  stand  properly,  and  proves  that  it  is  unfinished.  The  narrow  mouth 
(0.22  inch)  and  the  long  neck  of  this  piece  suggest  that  it  was  made  to  hold  a fine  powder 
such  as  kohl,  while  the  fluting  ornamentation  is  unique  as  far  as  the  Harappa  Culture  is 
concerned;  the  nearest  approach  to  this  kind  of  decoration  is  the  horizontal  fluting  on  the 
stem  of  a copper  food-stand  from  Mohenjo-daro.*^  Eluting  is,  however,  often  found  on 
Sumerian  vessels  contemporary  with,  and  earlier  than,  this  specimen. The  process  was  at 
first  intended  to  stiffen  the  sides  of  metal  vessels,  but  later  on,  as  so  often  happens,  it  was 
adopted  as  a mode  of  decoration. 

The  large  shallow  platters  seen  in  Pis.  LXXIV,  10  and  EXXV,  10,  14  were  well  known 
at  Mohenjo-daro,  although  it  is  not  certain  how  they  were  used.  They  are  frequently  found 
nested  together  in  hoards  (see  Pi.  LXXV,  10)  and  are  sometimes  impossible  to  separate 
without  breaking.  Specimens  from  Chanhu-daro  vary  but  little  in  size,  the  smallest  being 
9.7  and  the  largest  10.21  inches  in  diameter.  Their  substantial  make  indicates  that  they 
are  all  castings. 

The  unfinished  casting  in  PI.  LXX,  27  so  closely  resembles  the  moulded  upper  portions 
of  certain  food-stands  (PI.  XXV,  21)  that  it  is  possible  that  miniature  vessels  of  this  type 
were  also  made  in  copper  and  bronze  as  well  as  in  faience.^® 

Jar-covers  (Pis.  LXVl,  6,  LXXIII,  36,  LXXV,  1 1 ) 

These  are  made  of  beaten  copper  and  are  similar  in  type  to  specimens  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro.  The  form  is  also  known  in  pottery  (Pi.  XXVI,  45).  In  Pi.  LXXV,  1 1 one  of 
these  covers  is  seen  adhering  to  two  tools,  its  underside  only  appearing  in  the  photograph.  A 
better  idea  of  what  it  originally  looked  like  may  be  gained  from  the  restoration  illustrated 
in  Pi.  EXVI,  6.  The  boss  surmounting  the  cover  is  secured  by  a strip  of  metal,  0.3  inch  wide, 
whose  ends  pass  through  the  top  of  the  cover  and  are  then  bent  back  inside  the  boss. 

No.  36  in  PI.  LXXIII  has  its  edge  stiffened  by  being  slightly  turned  up  all  round,  while 
the  punch  markings  round  it,  which  have  been  made  from  the  under  side,  are  probably 
intended  to  serve  the  same  purpose.  These  marks  form  three  lines  of  pimples  round  the 
cover  and  the  boss  on  the  top  has  been  perforated  to  take  a metal  ring-handle.  This  handle 

F.  E.  M,  pis.  CXXII,  10,  CXXVIII,  15. 

iVI.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXLIj  5' 

Woolley,  Antiquaries  Journal,  vols.  II,  pi.  VI,  VIII,  p.  24. 

For  a model  dish  of  this  type  of  vessel  in  faience,  see  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CVI,  10. 


178 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


must  have  been  anciently  lost  for  a transverse  hole  has  been  bored  through  this  part  of  the 
cover  to  take  a string. 

Scale-fans  and  Beams  (Pis.  LXU,  2-4,  8, 10.  LXIll,p,  13,  LXVI,  12,  LXVll,  2,  LXXIV,  yj 

Quite  a number  of  scale-pans  were  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro.  They  are  all  simple 
dishes  of  beaten  work  and  in  some  cases  have  become  considerably  thickened  by  metallic 
deposits.  Occasionally  the  three  holes  by  which  these  pans  were  suspended  are  still  to  be 
seen,  but  often  they  have  become  blocked  up  and  cannot  now  be  traced. 

Beams  that  belonged  to  various  balances  are  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXIII,  1 1,  LXXI,  1-3, 
LXXVI,  18,  but  curiously  enough  none  have  been  found  with  a hole  in  the  centre  to  take 
a suspension  cord  or  chain.  All  these  beams  have  slightly  thickened  ends  to  prevent  the 
strings  which  held  the  pans  from  slipping  off.  A very  corroded  object  unearthed  at  Mohenjo- 
daro  was  also  identified  as  a scale-beam;  ” this  too  had  no  central  hole.  It  was  found  near  two 
small  pans  and  bore  string-markings  at  one  end. 

Two  pans,  one  very  badly  preserved,  were  found  in  the  group  that  contained  the  beam 
illustrated  in  PI.  LXIII,  1 1. 


Blade-axes  (Pis.  LXU,  20,  22,  LXIII,  LXVI,  ys,  1 p,  LXVII,  21,  LXIX,  lyip,  LXX,2q, 
30,  LXXI,  4-6,  II,  LXXIV,  1, 8, 1 1, 14,  LXXVI,  4-6) 


As  at  Mohenjo-daro  these  blade-axes  are  of  two  main  types,  long  and  short.  They  all 
appear  from  their  colour  to  have  been  made  of  hard  bronze;  some  are  mere  fragments  that 
have  obviously  been  preserved  in  order  to  be  melted  down. 

Nos.  I and  la  in  PI.  LXXIV  are  line  drawings  of  the  incised  inscriptions  found  on 
the  sides  of  a broken  a.xe.  Some  of  the  signs  in  No.  i appear  to  represent  numerical 
characters  and  are  similar  to  those  incised  on  an  axe  of  the  same  shape  discovered  at 
Mohenjo-daro.^®  Possibly  these  numbers  are  meant  to  be  read  as  thirty-five  (or  thirty-six 
if  the  last  digit  is  not  meant  for  a stick  in  the  hand  of  the  man  alongside).  On  the  Mohenjo- 
daro  blade  the  numbers  apparently  denote  seventy-six.  If  this  interpretation  of  the  characters 
is  correct,  they  are  more  likely  to  refer  to  the  number  of  implements  in  the  owner’s  possession 
rather  than  to  the  weight  of  the  object  on  which  they  are  placed.  This  most  interesting 
fragment  was  found,  together  with  various  other  metal  objects,  in  the  large  pottery  pan 
shown  in  PI.  XXIX,  37. 

Another  inscription  was  cut  on  the  complete  axe  seen  in  Pi.  LXIII,  3 (see  also 
Pi.  LXXIV,  8).  There  would  seem  to  have  been  five  characters  on  one  side  of  this  blade; 
of  these  only  the  first  three  are  decipherable.  Reading  from  the  left  these  appear  under 
numbers  ccxxxviii,  clvii,  cliv  in  Smith  and  Gadd’s  sign  list.^® 

At  Mohenjo-daro  inscribed  implements  were  rare  and  w'ere  found  only  in  the  lower 
levels  of  that  city,  so  that  the  finding  of  these  two  axes  at  Chanhu-daro  at  levels  -fi  10.4 


" F.  E.  M.,  p.  477,  pi.  CXXXII,  7. 
F.  E.  M.,  p.  454;  pi.  CXXVI,  5. 
M.  1.  C.,  pis.  CXIX-CXXIX. 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


179 


and  + 9.3  feet  respectively  adds  another  link  to  the  chain  of  evidence  that  the  Harappa  II 
level  at  the  latter  is  equivalent  in  date  to  the  Intermediate  Period  at  the  former  site. 

No.  20  in  PI.  LXII  is  shaped  like  an  axe  but  is  too  thin  to  have  been  anything  but  a 
model.  The  same  applies  to  No.  29  in  Pi.  LXX,  which  is  of  the  colour  of  bronze  and  is 
fashioned  out  of  sheet  metal  0.03  inch  thick. 

The  broken  fragment  shown  in  PI.  LXII,  22  must  have  been  part  of  an  axe  of  excep- 
tional size  and  w'eight,  and  the  absence  of  its  lower  portion  is,  therefore,  all  the  more 
regrettable. 

The  little  axe  seen  in  PI.  LXX,  30  and  again  in  Pi.  LXXVI,  4 has  a very  narrow  butt 
and  differs  in  this  respect  from  the  usual  type.  From  its  colour  it  would  seem  to  be  in 
hard  bronze. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  fragments  of  the  butt  ends  of  axes  are  more  often  found 
than  pieces  from  the  edge  ends.  Possibly  the  latter  flew  off  and  became  lost  in  the  under- 
growth when  these  tools  became  broken,  whereas  the  former  remained  in  their  lashings  on 
the  handles.  The  broken  edges,  both  of  fractured  axes  and  other  tools,  often  show  a certain 
amount  of  cry'stallization.  Doubtless  this  commenced  when  the  implements  were  being 
hammered  into  shape  and  was  intensified  during  use. 


Adzes  (Pis.  LXII,  21,  23,  LXIV,  8,  10,  11,  LXVlll,  11,  12,  LXXl,  9,  10,  LXXIV,  3,  p, 
LXXV,  5,  8j 


These  differ  from  the  blade-axes  in  that  they  are  longer  and  slenderer.  There  is  no 
marked  dissimilarity  between  the  Chanhu-daro  and  Mohenjo-daro  specimens.  No.  1 1 in 
Pi.  LXVIII  (see  also  PI.  LXXV,  5)  is  unusually  long  and  may  have  been  made  for  some 
special  purpose. 


Saw  (Pls.LXlU,i,LXXlV,4) 

This  interesting  tool  is  without  teeth,  handle,  or  even  rivet  holes  for  a handle  to  be 
attached.  In  general  shape  it  is  not  unlike  a saw  discovered  in  our  early  work  at  Mohenjo- 
daro.'“  The  absence  of  a toothed  edge  suggests  that  it  was  used  exclusively  for  stone  working, 
possibly  to  slice  nodules  of  agate  or  carnelian;  some  agate  bars  which  were  to  be  converted 
into  beads  actually  bear  saw-marks  (Pi.  LXXXVI,  b,  9).  The  saw  for  this  kind  of  work 
would  preferably  be  of  copper  rather  than  of  bronze,  with  possibly  a stiffening  bar  of  wood  or 
metal  along  the  upper  edge,  like  that  on  a modern  tenon  saw.  To  assist  its  action  an  abrasive 
of  some  hind,  such  as  powdered  quartz  or  emery,  would  also  be  necessary.  Fragments  of 
soft  stone,  such  as  alabaster,  limestone,  and  steatite,  found  in  the  Indus  cities  show  that  a 
workman  was  rarely  able  to  cut  straight  through  even  a soft  piece  of  stone  but  attacked  it 
from  various  angles  until  he  was  able  to  break  it  in  the  centre  of  the  cuts.  This  is  just  what 
one  would  expect  to  happen  if  a saw  of  the  kind  w'e  illustrate  was  used  on  stone,  especially 
if,  as  seems  likely,  its  range  was  limited  by  a support  along  the  top. 


=0  M.  I.  a,  pis.  CXXXVII,  7,  CXXXVIII,  8. 


i8o 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Spear-heads  (Pis.  LXlll,  2,  4,  5,  LXV,  1,  9,  LXXl,  12,  LXXVl,  17} 

These  large  blades  are  presumed  to  be  spear-beads,  although  they  resemble  some  of 
the  larger  knives  in  shape. 

No.  12  in  PI.  LXXI  (see  also  PI.  LXXVl,  17)  is  nearly  thirteen  inches  long,  but  its 
blade  is  only  0.12  inch  thick.  A wooden  mid-rib,  probably  formed  by  the  split  and  tapered 
end  of  the  shaft  to  which  this  head  was  once  affixed  originally  supported  the  blade  and  was 
secured  in  place  by  thongs  passed  through  the  tw'O  large  holes  near  the  base  of  the  head.  A 
rivet  hole  at  the  end  of  the  tang  also  helped  to  hold  the  blade  firm.  A specimen  very  similar 
to  this  but  about  two  inches  longer  was  found  in  the  excavations  at  Vlohenjo-daro.*^ 

Certain  spear-heads  from  Cyprus  and  the  Cyclades  have  holes  or,  more  often,  slits  by 
which  they  could  be  lashed  to  split  shafts,^'  and  the  same  feature  appears  in  certain  spear- 
heads of  the  Late  Bronze  Age  from  England  and  Prance,  although  by  this  time  the  mid-rib 
had  become  bronze  and  was  cast  as  an  integral  part  of  the  blade.^^ 

The  remaining  specimens  do  not  merit  much  description.  They  average  o.i  i inch  in 
thickness,  which  is  certainly  on  the  thin  side  for  this  type  of  weapon,  though  they  would, 
of  course,  have  been  strengthened  to  a great  extent  by  the  addition  of  the  wooden  mid-rib 
explained  above. 

Prom  its  shape  the  rough  casting  seen  in  Pi.  LXV,  9 and  again  in  Pi.  LXXIV,  16  was 
probably  intended  for  one  of  these  flat  blades.  It  has  slightly  bevelled  edges  and  the  metal, 
presumably  bronze,  had  been  poured  into  a simple  open  mould. 

Lance-head  (Pi.  LXX,  31) 

This  little  blade  with  its  two  tie-  and  rivet-holes  may  conceivably  have  been  used  as 
a lance-head. 

Daggers  (Pis.  LXVlll,  13, 15,  LXXV,9,  LXXVl,  ^o) 

Only  three  of  the  various  blades  found  are  likely  to  have  been  used  as  daggers.  The 
first,  No.  13  in  PI.  LXVIII  (see  also  Pi.  LXXV,  9),  is  without  mid-rib  or  even  any  thickening 
down  its  axis  and  has  a slightly  rounded  point.  The  second.  No.  1 5 in  the  same  plate,  has 
straight  shoulders  and  edges  that  show  repeated  sharpening.  No.  30  in  Pi.  LXXVl  is  in  a 
veiy^  corroded  state;  it  measures  12.12  inches  in  length. 

Daggers  belonging  to  an  advanced  civilization  are  frequently  difficult  to  distinguish 
from  knives,  and  this  is  especially  true  of  implements  found  in  the  cities  of  the  Indus  Valley. 

Large  knives  (Pis.  LXll,  16,  17,  LXIV,,  1-7,  LXV,  2-8,  LX\^1I,  12,  14-16,  20,  LXVIII, 
10,16,  LXIX,  1,2,4,  LXXIl,  1-5,  LXXIV,  17) 

The  above  knives,  which  were  also  very  common  at  Mohenjo-daro,  are,  with  one 
exception,  simple  in  shape.  Their  tangs  are  seldom  pierced  by  rivet-holes  and  their  double 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  459, 460;  pi.  LXXI,  33. 

Hall,  Bronze  Age  of  Greece,  p.  87. 

Guide  to  the  Antiquities  of  the  Bronze  Age,  Brit.  Mus.  (1920),  p.  129,  fig.  136;  Antiquaries 
Journal,  vol.  VIII,  p.  32,  pi.  XII. 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


i8i 


edges  are  sometimes  markedly  concave  through  constant  sharpening.  All  originally  had 
wooden  handles  which  were  probably  secured  in  place  by  lashings,  aided,  perhaps,  by  some 
kind  of  cement.  A knife  (No.  2594,0)  which  is  not  illustrated  here  has  a large  hole  in  its 
tang  through  which  a round,  slightly  tapered  piece  of  wire  has  been  passed  to  serve  as  a 
rivet,  and  the  ends  of  this  have  been  bent  at  right  angles  to  keep  the  handle  (now,  of  course, 
non-existent)  in  place.  Judging  by  the  distance  between  the  bends,  the  handle  must  have 
been  0.99  inch  thick,  or  possibly  even  a little  more  if  the  ends  of  the  rivet  were  embedded 
in  the  wood.  A second  rivet-hole  in  this  same  knife,  well  below  the  tang,  shows  that  the 
handle  must  have  extended  some  way  along  the  blade  itself.*^  The  high  position  of  the  rivet- 
hole  in  No.  I of  Pi.  LXIX  indicates  that  its  handle  must  also  have  enclosed  a considerable 
portion  of  its  blade. 

The  knife  with  a curved  point  seen  in  Pis.  LXIV,  5 and  LXXIV,  1 7 is  of  a type  well 
known  at  both  Harappa  and  Mohenjo-daro^°  and  is  thought  to  have  been  used  in  preparing 
leather.  In  shape  it  closely  resembles  a gold  blade  found  in  one  of  the  Royal  Tombs  at  Ur,*® 
except  for  the  fact  that  the  latter  has  a toothed  edge.  More  often  than  not  this  type  of  Indian 
knife  is  found  with  a missing  point. 

The  fragment  shown  in  Pi.  LXIV,  7,  once  part  of  an  unusually  large  blade,  has  an 
exceptionally  long  tang. 

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  daggers  and  knives  illustrated  here  are  all  without 
mid-ribs.  Their  blades  are  in  every  case  very  thin  and  only  No.  20  in  Pi.  LXVII  has  any 
perceptible  thickening  down  its  centre.  This  method  of  stiffening  blades  was,  however, 
rarely  carried  out;  it  is  found  on  only  two  daggers  and  two  swords  from  Mohenjo-daro.^^ 
The  comparative  rarity  of  the  device  in  implements  of  the  Harappa  Culture  may  be 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  most  of  them  were  made  of  sheet  metal  and  not  cast. 

Small  knives  (Pis.  LXll,  11,  LXIZI,  10,14,  LXVI,  16,  LXVIII,  8,  LXX,  21-25, 

7, 8,  LXXV,  1 1 , LXXVI,  8, 2 5-27) 

These  are  more  varied  in  shape  than  the  larger  knives.  No.  1 1 in  PI.  LXII  has  a short, 
(vide  tang  and  has  been  honed  so  often  that  it  is  no  longer  symetrical.  Both  ends  of  No.  10 
in  Pi.  LXIII  are  missing;  its  cutting  edge  is  on  the  curv'ed  side  and  the  top  edge  is  slightly 
thickened.  The  crescent-shaped  object  No.  14  in  the  same  plate  may  have  been  used  for 
flaying.  It  now  measures  3.83  inches  long  and  both  ends  are  missing.  The  inner  side  or 
back  is  0.2  inch  thick  and  slopes  gradually  to  an  edge  along  the  outer  curve.  No.  16  in 
Pi.  LXVI  (see  also  Pi.  LXXV,  1 1 ) has  a rivet  that  originally  secured  a wooden  handle.  The 
little  blade  without  a tang  in  Pi.  LXVIII,  8,  which  is  shown  again  in  PI.  LXXVI,  25,  is  new 
to  us  in  its  present  form;  it  may  have  been  kept  in  use  after  the  tang  was  broken  off. 

This  knife  was  associated  with  the  tools  appearing  in  PI.  LXXVI,  29-30. 

Ann.  Rep.  Arch.  Snrv.  hid.,  1926-27,  pi.  XXII,  4,  5;  Ai.l.C.,  pi.  CXXXV,  6;  F.E.M.,  pi. 
CXXXIII,  28,31. 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  p.  309,  pi.  229. 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  466-7;  pis.  CXX,  17-19,  CXVIII,  9. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


182 


The  two  blades  in  PL  LXX,  21, 22  are  both  in  a bad  state  of  preservation;  indeed  the 
last  is  so  worn  that  it  is  almost  shapeless.  Three  knives,  Nos.  23,  24,  25  in  this  same  plate, 
are  all  types  that  are  well  known  at  Alohenjo-daro.  Nos.  23  and  25  of  these  appear  again  in 
photograph  in  PI.  LXXVI,  26, 27;  their  cutting  edges  are  on  the  lower  portions  only. 

No.  7 in  PI.  LXXI  (see  again  Pi.  LXXVI,  8)  is  a thin  blade  wath  a rivet  hole  in  the 
handle  and  another  well  up  the  body.  No.  8 in  the  same  plate  has  been  badly  damaged  by 
salt  and  is  greatly  swollen  in  consequence;  originally  it  seems  to  have  been  quite  a 
thin  blade. 

Knives  of  so  small  a size  as  these  can  hardly  have  been  used  for  ordinary  household 
purposes;  probably  they  were  needed  for  some  particular  craft  or  trade. 

Razors 

Razors,  as  at  Mohenjo-daro,  came  to  light  in  a surprising  variety  of  types,  which  may  be 
catalogued  as  follows: 

(a) .  Double-bladed  (Pis.  LXVII,  i,  LXXIII,  25-27,  LXXVI,  34-36). 

(b) .  L-shaped  (Pis.  LXXIII,  33,  LXXVI,  33). 

(c) .  Hook-shaped  (Pi.  LXXIII,  22, 28). 

(d) .  Simple  blades  (Pis.  LXVII,  7,  LXX,  28). 

To  these  must  be  added  two  new  types  which,  so  far,  have  been  found  only  at 
Chanhu-daro: 

(e) .  U-shaped  (Pis.  LXXIII,  32,  LXXVI,  28). 

(f) .  Crescent-shape  (Pi.  LXXIII,  31). 

The  double-bladed  razors  of  Type  (a),  of  a shape  peculiar  to  the  Harappa  Culture, 
are  by  far  the  most  common.  It  is  a moot  point  whether  their  long  tangs  were  encased  with 
wood,  but  the  exceptional  length  of  the  tang  of  the  instrument  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  25  (see 
again  PI.  LXXVI,  35)  indicates  that  here,  at  any  rate,  wood  cannot  have  been  used,  although 
a cord  may  have  been  wound  around  to  ensure  a hrmer  grip.  The  nearest  approach  to  this 
type  that  I have  seen  comes  from  Rollestone  in  England.^® 

Two  examples  of  Type  (b)  were  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  two  more  have 
appeared  at  Chanhu-daro.  One  of  these  is  shown  in  PI.  LXXIII,  33  and  again  in  PI.  LXXVI, 
33.  The  other  (No.  2594,  M)  measures  2.8  inches  in  length  and  2.7  inches  in  width  and 
was  found  with  the  three  objects  depicted  in  PI.  LXXVI,  29-31. 

The  hook-shaped  T^qje  (c)  shown  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  22,  28  has  the  cutting  edge  on  the 
straight  end  only,  while  a curved  handle,  usually  terminating  in  the  head  of  a duck  or  goose, 
enables  the  instrument  to  be  manipulated  easily.  This  last  feature,  howev'er,  does  not  appear 
to  advantage  in  the  Chanhu-daro  examples  and  the  reader  is  referred  to  a better  finished 
specimen  from  Mohenjo-daro.^“  Most  of  these  razors,  irrespective  of  type,  were  cut  out  of 

Catalogue,  Devizes  Museum,  No.  i8a. 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CXVIII,  7,  CXXV,  41,  CXXI,  26. 

““  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CXXI,  41,  CXXV,  39. 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


183 


thick  sheet  metal  and  finished  on  the  anvil,  but  in  the  case  of  Type  (c)  a certain  amount 
of  cutting  or  filing  would  have  been  necessary  to  round  off  the  edges  of  the  handle  and 
shape  the  bird’s  head.  Razors  rather  similar  to  this  last  type  have  been  found  in  Denmark,®^ 
but  an  even  closer  comparison  may  be  drawn  betw'een  the  Chanhu-daro  examples  and 
razors  found  in  the  Bord-ed-Djedid  graves  of  Carthage,^"  especially  with  regard  to  the  bird’s 
head  on  the  handle. 

The  very  thin  rectangular  piece  of  copper  in  Pi.  LXX,  28  has  an  edge  at  either  end  and, 
although  it  is  really  a new  type,  it  may  for  the  present  be  included  with  Type  (d).  A 
second  blade  of  the  same  kind,  but  considerably  narrower,  may  be  seen  in  PI.  LXVII,  7. 
These  two  razors  were  probably  held  by  a split  wooden  handle  set  at  right  angles  to 
the  blades. 

Two  examples  of  the  new  Type  (e)  are  shown  in  Pis.  LXXIII,  32  and  LXXVI,  28; 
unfortunately  they  have  suffered  from  corrosion  and  it  is  now  difficult  to  say  which  was 
originally  the  cutting  edge.  It  seems  likely,  however,  that  it  was  on  the  rounded  outer 
margins  of  the  instrument  and,  if  this  was  so,  a straight  wooden  handle  may  have  been 
fitted  between  and  enclosing  the  two  ends,  making  the  razor  resemble  a type  known  in  the 
British  Isles. 

The  crescent-shaped  example  of  Type  (f)  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  31  has  a definite  edge  round 
the  outer  margin,  and  the  ends,  one  of  which  is  now  missing,  may  have  been  inserted  in  a 
bar  handle  like  that  described  in  connection  with  Type  (e)  above. 

Of  the  above-mentioned  six  types,  razors  conforming  to  Type  (d)  only  have  been  found 
in  Sumer  or  adjoining  countries,  and  it  must  be  assumed  that,  so  far  as  the  Middle  East 
is  concerned,  the  other  five  are  peculiar  to  India. 

Arrow-heads  (Pis.  LXVIII,  6,  LXXIII,  1-4, 13-16) 

With  two  exceptions  these  arrow-heads  are  of  the  Mohenjo-daro  type,  being  without 
tangs  and  having  such  long  fragile  barbs  that  very  few  of  them  have  survived  intact.  They 
have  all  been  cut  from  thin  pieces  of  sheet  copper,  varv’ing  from  0.02  to  0.05  inches  in 
thickness,  and  must  have  been  set  in  the  tapered  and  slit  ends  of  their  shafts,  so  that  the 
latter  formed  a stiff  wooden  mid-rib.  A cement  of  some  kind  must  have  been  used  to  fix 
these  heads  in  place,  for  no  tie-holes  in  them  occur. 

Strangely  enough,  metal  arrow-heads  of  this  type  apparently  do  not  occur  in  either 
Mesopotamia  or  Persia  and  but  rarely  in  other  countries.  Stone  specimens  of  which  the 
Indian  examples  are  copies  are  well  knowm,  however,  in  these  two  countries.  The  flint 
form,  as  a matter  of  fact,  has  been  found  in  Northern  Europe,  the  Danube  Corridor,  Spain, 
and  Portugal,  and  it  was  also  used  in  Egypt  in  Badarian  times. 

No.  I in  PI.  LXXIII  is  a new  type,  being  without  barbs;  what  is  left  of  its  broken  tang 
is  0.19  inch  wide  and  0.08  inch  thick.  It  may  once  have  resembled  an  arrowhead  found 

Guide  to  the  Antiquities  of  the  Bronze  Age,  Brit.  Mus.,  1920,  p.  135,  fig.  144. 

Moore,  Carthage  of  the  Phoenicians,  pp.  92,  98. 

Guide  to  Antiquities  of  the  Bronze  Age,  Brit.  Mus.,  1920,  p.  56,  fig.  46. 


184 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


at  Ghazi  Shah/^  No.  13  in  the  same  plate  is  unique  as  far  as  the  Harappa  Culture  is 
concerned.  As  it  was  found  high  up  in  Trench  6(5)  it  may  have  been  washed  down  from 
above.  It  could  well  be  of  the  Jhukar  Period  but  we  have  no  other  specimen  of  that 
period  with  which  to  compare  it.  Apart  from  its  excessively  long  tang,  however,  it  does 
not  materially  differ  from  the  earlier  examples. 

Fish-hooks  (Pis.  LXXUl,  5-8, 17, 18,  LXXVl,  15) 

These  again  are  of  the  same  type  as  those  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  but  Nos.  6 and  8 in 
PI.  LXXIII  are  unusual  in  possessing  no  barbed  points.  All  these  hooks  are  made  from  stout 
bronze  wire  and  were  sometimes  liable  to  become  bent  out  of  shape,  as  No.  7 shows.  None 
of  the  points  are  off-set  in  any  way.  Barbed  fish-hooks  of  such  an  early  date  are  unknown 
outside  India. 

Chisels 

Chisels  were  by  far  the  most  common  tool  found  at  Chanhu-daro.  As  was  the  case 
at  Mohenjo-daro,  they  fall  into  five  main  categories: 

(a) .  Long,  rectangular  or  square  in  section,  generally  of  uniform  thickness  throughout 

their  length  (Pis.  LXII,  18, 19,  LXIII,6-8,  LXVI,  13, 17-20,  LXIX,  12,  LXX,8- 

12, 17, 1 9, 20,  LXXVl,  3, 1 o,  1 1 ). 

(b) .  Rectangular  or  square  in  section  with  a long  flattened  tang  (Pis.  LXII,  12, 13, 

LXIII,  12,  LXVII,  II,  18, 19,  LXX,  13-15,  LXXVl,  9, 14). 

(c) .  Round  in  section.  The  two  chisels  (Nos.  3325, 4830)  of  this  type  are  not 

illustrated.®' 

(d) .  Short,  round,  or  rectangular  or  square  in  section  (Pis.  LXII,  15,  LXVII,  9, 10, 

LXX,  1-5, 7,  LXXIV,  6,  LXXVl,  12). 

(e) .  Short  and  pointed  (Pis.  LXX,  6,  LXXVl,  13). 

Chisels  belonging  to  Type  (a)  are  the  most  common.  Their  angular  bodies  made  them 
easy  to  manipulate  with  the  fingers.  They  must  have  been  used  on  various  kinds  of  work, 
and  gravers  such  as  could  have  been  used  to  carve  the  seals  were  included  amongst  them. 
Type  (b)  is  peculiar  to  the  Harappa  Culture  and  was  probably  used  only  in  wood-working. 
Their  long  flat  tangs  were  undoubtedly  encased  in  wooden  handles  and  their  butt  ends  in 
consequence  are  rarely  found  burred  by  the  hammer.®'  Type  (c)  is  definitely  rare, 
although  simply  made  out  of  a round  rod  of  copper  or  bronze  flattened  at  one  end  to  form 
an  edge. 

The  short  chisels  coming  under  Types  (d)  and  (e)  appear  to  have  been  used  exclu- 
sively on  metal;  their  heads  frequently  show  heavy  burring.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  them 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  103,  pi.  XLI,  24. 

The  first  was  found  in  Square  8/B,  locus  449.  Level : 7.8  ft.  The  second  comes  from 

Mound  I,  Square  13/J,  locus  5.  Level:  + 

Remains  of  a wooden  handle  were  seen  on  each  side  of  the  tang  of  No.  2529  (E.  E.). 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


185 


were  originally  clasped  in  a handle  set  at  right  angles  to  the  tool.  No.  7 in  Pi.  LXX  is 
unusual  because  its  head  has  become  pent-shaped  from  being  used  at  an  angle.  The  pointed 
examples  coming  under  Type  (e)  are  distinctly  rare. 

The  curious  longitudinal  groove  down  the  centre  of  both  sides  of  the  chisel  in  Pi. 
LXVII,  10  suggests  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  divide  it  into  two  equal  parts.  The 
long,  flat  tool  in  Pi.  LXVI,  17  was  found  closely  folded  over  twice  and  was  evidently 
awaiting  consignment  to  the  melting  pot.  One  unfinished  chisel  (No.  2594,  D),  belonging 
to  Type  (b)  was  unearthed  together  with  the  other  tools  illustrated  in  Pi.  LXXVI,  29-3 1 . 

All  the  examples  that  we  illustrate,  except  the  pointed  ones,  have  double-sloped  edges 
and  in  this  respect  are  quite  unlike  their  modern  counterparts. 

Awls 

These  are  of  two  types: 

(a) .  Rectangular  or  round  in  section,  rounded  at  one  or  both  ends  (Pis.  LXII,  14, 

LXXII,  6-10,12-15). 

(b) .  Round  in  section  (Pis.  LXII,  9,  LXVI,  14,  21,  LXX,  18,  LXXII,  16,  17, 

LXXV,  13). 

Type  (a),  which  is  made  from  a square  or  rectangular  rod  of  copper  or  bronze,  is 
frequently  pointed  at  both  ends.  Sometimes  these  points  are  abrupt  but  more  often  they  are 
attenuated  like  those  in  PI.  LXXII,  7, 9.  The  point  of  No.  9 now  takes  a hook-like  form; 
it  is  uncertain  whether  this  is  by  accident  or  design.  No.  1 3 in  the  plate  has  a broad  edge  at 
one  end  and  may  have  been  used  as  a scraper  as  well  as  an  awl.  Awls  of  this  type  have,  or 
had,  points  at  both  ends. 

Type  (b)  is  as  common  as  Type  (a).  Some  of  these  might  have  served  equally  well  as 
pins,  either  for  the  hair  or  for  fastening  a cloak. 

An  interesting  group  of  eight  awls  (No.  4712)  was  found  in  our  Great  Cutting.®^ 
These  were  all  firmly  cemented  together  by  corrosion  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  properly 
inspected.  Each  awl  had  a rounded  point  at  both  ends  and  the  largest  of  them  is  4.05  inches 
long  and  0.2  by  0.2  inch  square  in  section  in  the  middle. 

Rods  (Pis.  LXX,  16,  LXXII,  1 1 ) 

No.  16  in  Pi.  LXX  is  a long  rod,  round  in  section,  with  a portion  missing  from  one 
end.  It  may  have  been  originally  a chisel  or  an  awl. 

The  object  of  bronze  (from  its  colour)  in  Pi.  LXXII,  1 1 is  rectangular  in  the  middle 
and  rounds  off  towards  the  two  ends,  which  average  o.  1 7 inch  in  diameter.  This  object  may 
have  been  the  beam  of  a balance,  although  it  differs  slightly  from  the  other  examples  in 
Pi.  LXXI,  1-3.  Before  it  was  cleaned  its  surface  showed  in  places  the  imprint  of  a woven 
fabric  which,  to  judge  from  our  experience  at  Mohenjo-daro,  was  made  by  a cotton  cloth.^® 


Square  9/F,  locus  469.  Level:  -f  0.05  ft. 


F.  E.M.,  pp.  591-3. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


1 86 

Spatulai?)  (PI.  LXVll,  8) 

This  specimen  has  one  end  missing;  from  its  shape  and  thinness,  it  would  seem  to 
have  served  the  purpose  of  a spatula.  It  would  have  been  useful  in  preparing  fatty  cosmetics 
or  colours. 

TMar  Drills  (Pis.  LXII,  7,  LXXX,^,  LXXXl,  25) 

Actual  examples  of  these  drills  are  rare,  and  in  any  case  they  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  employed  to  any  great  extent  at  Chanhu-daro.  Mohenjo-daro,  however,  has  provided 
plenty  of  evidence  that  they  were  largely  used  there,  principally  on  soft  stones  like  limestone 
and  alabaster.^®  These  drills  take  the  form  of  tapered  tubes  of  thin  copper  or  bronze  and 
are  so  carefully  made  and  perfectly  rounded  that  it  seems  likely  that  they  were  shaped  on 
a mandrel.  Their  edges  meet  exactly  and  do  not  overlap  in  any  way.  No.  1 5 in  Pi.  LXXXI 
is  1.62  inches  long  and  has  been  so  thickened  by  incrustation  that  it  was  for  some  time 
mistaken  for  a bead.  Another  drill  of  the  same  type,  which  is  not  illustrated,  is  1.6  inches 
long  and  0.4  inch  in  diameter  at  one  end  and  0.22  inch  at  the  other.^'’  This  last  specimen  was 
discovered  with  a number  of  steatite  beads  of  the  wafer  type  (PI.  LXXXIII,  35-44)  and  could 
well  have  been  used  to  form  this  type  of  bead. 

Bead-tools  (Pis.  LXXX,  1-8,  XCIII,  12, 23) 

Six  examples  of  this  new  type  of  tool  were  found  in  a room  with  a number  of  beads 
of  minute  size  and  it  appears  likely  that  they  were  used  in  their  manufacture.  No.  i, 
measuring  1.9  inches  in  length,  appears  to  be  a bronze  casting.  A point  protrudes  from  its 
lower  end  and  this  is  partly  shielded  by  a flange  that  encircles  it.  No.  2,  which  was 
associated  with  No.  i,  is  1.65  inches  long.  It  has  much  the  same  shape  but  is  without  the 
flange  and  has  a deep  depression  in  its  upper  end.  These  two  objects  are  badly  preserved, 
as  Pi.  XCIII,  1 2,  1 3 show,  and  further  cleaning,  if  this  be  possible,  may  reveal  that  they 
are  really  of  tubular  construction  and  resemble,  therefore,  the  remaining  tools  to  be  described. 

No.  3 is  a copper  or  bronze  tube,  0.95  inch  long,  with  a hne  tube  of  the  same  metal, 
whose  point  is  missing,  inserted  in  the  lower  end.  No.  4,  1.05  inches  long,  has  a strip  of 
metal  0.28  inch  in  diameter  and  0.12  inch  wide  wrapped  round  its  bottom  edge.  The 
point  or  tube  of  this  instrument,  however,  is  missing.  Nos.  5-8  are  all  of  similar  shape  and 
construction.  No.  6 has  the  best-preserved  tubular  point,  which  measures  0.25  inch  long 
and  0.08  inch  in  diameter,  while  the  overall  length  of  the  tool  is  0.93  inch.  No.  8 has  its 
hollow  point  inserted  in  a copper  ring  0.26  inch  in  diameter;  whether  by  accident  or 
design  it  is  difficult  to  say. 

When  these  strange  tools  first  came  to  light  it  was  decided  that  they  had  been  used  in 
the  manufacture  of  the  minute  beads  which  appear  en  masse  in  Pi.  XCIII,  5 and  will  be 
described  in  the  following  chapter.  And  Mr.  William  J.  Young  of  the  Museum  of  Fine 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  320,  597,  598;  pi.  CXLIV,  5. 

No.  2394.  From  Square  9/D,  locus  215.  Level:  9.7  ft. 


187 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 

Arts,  Boston,  after  examining  specimeris  Nos.  6 and  7 has  come,  quite  independently,  to  the 
same  conclusion.  He  suggests  that  the  head-makers  forced  a powdered  steatite  mixed  to  a 
thick  paste  through  the  fine  tubular  points  of  these  instruments  in  much  the  same  way 
that  confectioners  to-day  force  frosting  through  tubes  to  ornament  cakes.  The  necessary 
pressure  could  easily  have  been  supplied  by  means  of  a metal  or  wooden  rod  sliding  inside 
the  upper  tube  of  the  tool,  which,  as  already  stated,  was  very  carefully  made  with  strictly 
parallel  sides.  A bag  doei  not  appear  to  have  been  used,  for  there  is  no  attachment  on  the 
top  of  any  of  the  instruments  to  which  it  could  have  been  fastened. 

Six  of  these  tools,  together  with  four  others  not  illustrated,  came  from  Square  9/D, 
room  215,  which  from  the  objects  found  in  it  was  evidently  a head  factor)^ 

Shovel  (PI.  LXXIV,  13) 

This  very  modern-looking  implement  may  have  been  used  in  lifting  charcoal  or  grain. 
It  measures  16.3  inches  in  length  with  its  handle,  and  is  the  first  specimen  of  its  kind 
that  has  appeared  in  any  of  the  Harappa  cities.  The  sides  and  base  of  this  tool  are  0.2  inch 
thick  and  it  now  weighs  3 lbs.  1 0V2  ounces.  The  plain  flat  handle  which  is  of  one  piece  of 
metal  with  the  pan  is  4.87  inches  long  by  an  average  of  1.5  inches  wide  and  0.21  inch 
thick.  This  last  has  no  rivet  holes,  but  is  obviously  too  short  to  have  been  used  without  a 
longer  attachment,  probably  of  wood. 

Stave-heads  (Pis.  LXVIII,  4,  LXXV,4) 

The  tw'o  objects  seen  in  Pi.  LXVIII,  4,  5 (see  also  PI.  LXXV,  4)  may  have  served  to 
surmount  ceremonial  staffs.  Both  are  bronze  castings  of  the  same  height  and  breadth  but 
slight  differences  between  them  prove  that  they  were  not  made  in  the  same  mould.  They 
are  of  exceptionally  clean  workmanship  and  little  was  required  to  be  done  to  them  beyond 
smoothing  their  surfaces. 

The  cap  in  Pi.  LXVIII,  7 is  also  well  made  and  like  the  stave-heads  described  above 
was  obviously  intended  to  be  riveted  to  something  of  a rod-like  nature. 

Phimh-hoh(? ) (Pi.  LXX,  26) 

This  object  appears,  from  its  shape,  to  have  been  a plumb-bob;  something  missing 
from  its  upper  end  was  perhaps  a perforated  lug  by  which  it  was  suspended.  The  surface 
of  this  article  has  been  either  exceptionally  well  finished  or  else  polished  by  much  use. 

Ingots  (PI.  LXXIV,  2) 

Up  to  the  present  only  two  ingots  have  come  to  light  in  our  excavations  at  Chanhu- 
daro.  The  first,  which  appears  in  PI.  LXXIV,  2,  is  a long  round  bar,  13.75  inches  in  length 
and  varj’ing  somewhat  in  diameter.  The  metal  is  bronze,  judging  from  its  colour,  and  it  was 
formed  by  pouring  the  molten  metal  into  a vertical  hole  in  the  ground.  The  numerous 
objects  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXII,  1-23,  LXIII,  1-5,  LXXIV,  2-9  were  associated  with  this  ingot. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


1 88 


The  second  example  is  not  illustrated/^  but  in  shape  it  resembles  closely  certain  ingots 
from  Mohenjo-daro.^^  It  has  a flat  top  and  a rounded  base,  and  its  diameter  measurement 
is  1.67  inches. 

Lead  Fragments 

Small  masses  of  lead  of  irregular  shape  were  found  in  various  parts  of  Mound  II.  It 
is  not  yet  known  for  what  purpose  this  metal  was  used. 


OBJECTS  OF  THE  JHUKAR  PERIOD  (?) 

Socketed  Axe  (Pis.  LXXll,  25,  LXXVl,  37) 

This  most  interesting  tool  was  found  at  the  high  level  of  + 17.6  feet  on  Mound  II, 
and  there  are  strong  reasons  for  ascribing  it  to  the  Jhukar  Period.  It  is  much  too  well  made 
to  have  been  the  work  of  the  Jhukar  people,  if  the  style  and  workmanship  of  their  pottery 
is  any  criterion,  nor  can  it  belong  to  the  Harappa  Period,  for  we  know  that  no  such  tools  were 
manufactured  or  used  by  the  people  of  that  culture. 

The  implement  is  made  of  bronze,  is  3.95  inches  long,  and  its  lunate  edge  is  i .94  inches 
wide.  The  interior  dimensions  of  its  slightly  oval  socket  are  0.82  by  0.71  inches.  It  appears 
to  have  been  cast  edge  down,  for  there  is  a slight  projection  at  the  back  of  the  socket  where 
the  metal  was  run  in.  It  has  a smooth,  even  surface  and  great  care  was  evidently  exercised 
in  its  finish. 

The  socketed  adze-axes  unearthed  at  Tepe  Hissar  “ so  closely  resemble  the  Mohenjo- 
daro  specimen  found  some  time  ago,^^  as  to  make  it  likely  that  they  are  all  products  of  the 
same  period.  With  them  must  now  be  included  the  present  Chanhu-daro  implement, 
which,  though  of  a less  complex  pattern,  is  nevertheless  allied  in  conception  and  technique. 
A date  which  covers  the  period  2000-1500  b.  c.  has  been  put  forward  for  stratum  III  in 
which  the  Hissar  axes  appeared.  Heine-Geldern,  however,  takes  the  view  that  the 
Mohenjo-daro  axe  cannot  be  earlier  than  about  1200  b.  c.,^’  a dating  considerably  later 
than  that  allow-ed  for  its  Tepe  Hissar  counterpart,  and  also  at  variance  with  that  allowed 
for  the  Astrabad  Treasure,  which  contained  several  adze-axes  of  a similar  type.^®  On  the 
strength  of  the  Chanhu-daro  tool  I do  not  think  we  shall  be  very  far  out  if  we  place  the 
Jhukar  Period  as  coeval  with  the  middle  of  the  Hissar  III  Period  and  with  the  First  Dynasty 
of  Babylon.^’’ 

No.  1 1 13,  found  in  Trench  H(i).  Level:  —7.9  ft. 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXXXII,  37,  38. 

E.  F.  Schmidt,  “ Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  Mus.  Jotirn.,  Univ.  Mus.,  Philadelphia,  p.  400, 
pl.CXVIIICH.  168). 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  457,  458;  pis.  CXX,  27,  CXXII,  12. 

Jotirn.  Ind.  Soc.  Orient.  Art,  vol.  IV,  1936,  p.  103. 

“ Ascribed  to  the  first  half  of  the  second  millennium  b.  c. 

The  middle  or  Hammurabi  Period  of  the  First  Dynasty  of  Babylon  is  now  closely  dated  by 
Sidney  Smith  to  1792-1750  b.  c.  ((Alalakh  and  Chronology,  p.  29). 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS  AND  UTENSILS 


189 


Whatever  way  one  looks  at  the  problem  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  that  the 
socket  invention,  or  perhaps  the  actual  tools  themselves,  must  have  taken  some  time  to 
reach  India  from  the  original  source.  Possibly  an  innate  conservatism  prevented  the 
Harappa  People  from  adopting  this  form  of  axe,  though  it  is  more  than  likely  that  some 
of  them  must  have  become  acquainted  with  it  in  the  course  of  their  trading  relations  with 
Sumer.  The  original  Sumerian  holed  axe  is,  however,  or  quite  a different  form  to  that  of  the 
perforated  Indian  examples,  which  last  seem  to  have  reached  India  from  Persia  via 
Baluchistan,  where,  as  we  have  already  seen,  jhukar  pottery  has  been  found.*® 

Chisel  (PI.LXXII,23) 

To  judge  from  the  high  level  at  which  it  was  found,  the  chisel  shown  in  Pi.  LXXII,  23 
may  also  be  attributed  to  the  Jhukar  Culture,  but  unfortunately  it  is  impossible  to  be 
certain  on  this  point,  as  we  do  not  yet  know  of  a single  metal  tool  or  copper  object  which 
dehnitely  belongs  to  that  time.  The  pins  numbered  18-20  in  the  same  plate,  which  will 
be  described  in  the  next  chapter,  may  be  an  exception  but  only  because  they  differ  so 
much  from  the  pins  used  by  the  Harappa  people.  The  upper  levels  of  Mound  II 
were  very  much  disturbed,  because  the  Jhukar  people  used  earlier  material.  Muhammadan 
graves  were  there,  and  brick  robbing  took  place  at  all  times.  It  was,  therefore,  difficult  in 
some  cases  to  ascertain  what  the  people  of  the  various  cultures  had  made  themselves  and 
what  they  had  borrowed  from  the  lower  levels.  The  potter)',  the  seals  and  a few  other 
objects  of  this  period  are  nevertheless  quite  distinctive. 


LATER  PERIODS 

Iron  Arrow-head  (Pi.  LXXll,  24) 

This  is  the  only  iron  object  found  at  Chanhu-daro.  It  came  from  Trench  B(i)  at 
the  level  —2.7  feet  and  close  to  the  surface  of  the  ground.  It  is  tolerably  well  preserved, 
has  no  sign  of  a mid-rib,  and  has  lost  a part  of  its  tang,  which  appears  originally  to  have 
been  a long  one.  I would,  for  the  present,  attribute  it  to  the  Jhangar  Period,  on  the 
ground  that  some  of  the  pottery  of  that  culture  resembles  certain  Iron  Age  wares  from 
southern  India. 

The  remaining  copper  and  bronze  objects,  such  as  bangles,  rings,  pins,  and  so  forth,  are 
more  appropriately  dealt  with  in  the  following  chapter  on  “ Personal  Ornaments.” 


Chap.  VII. 


Chapter  XIII 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 

Although  the  ornaments  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  are  comparatively  few  in  number 
and  consist  of  bracelets,  pendants,  rings,  and  pins  in  copper  and  bronze  only,  they  form 
nevertheless  an  interesting  collection.  Gold  and  silver  jewellery,  even  of  the  simplest 
description  was,  however,  entirely  absent,  although  occasional  fragments  of  thin  gold  foil 
were  found  adhering  to  copper  beads  and  bangles.  One  must  not  infer  that  these  metals  were 
not  worn  by  the  Chanhu-daro  people  at  all;  indeed,  it  is  likely  that  the  women  of  that  city 
carried  their  wealth  on  their  persons  in  the  form  of  ornaments,  as  do  many  of  the  poorer 
people  of  India  to-day,  and  that  they  took  these  away  with  them  when  they  deserted  the 
city.  The  above  remarks  apply  only  to  the  excavation  of  A found  II,  for  the  greater  part 
of  Mound  I still  remains  to  be  cleared.  Judging  from  the  poorly  built  structures— probably 
the  dwellings  of  working-class  people— on  the  summit  of  the  latter  mound,  there  is,  however, 
little  reason  to  expect  that  this  part  of  the  city  will  prove  any  richer  than  the  rest. 

The  exceptionally  fine  jewellery  found  both  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  at  Harappa  has, 
therefore,  no  counterpart  at  Chanhu-daro,  hut  from  the  way  the  people  lived  and  the  fact 
that  they  were  chiefly  engaged  in  crafts  of  various  kinds  one  can  hardly  expect  them  to 
have  worn  anything  that  was  exceptionally  rich  or  precious.  As  a matter  of  fact,  they  were 
quite  capable  of  fine  work,  even  in  copper  or  bronze,  as  the  two  ornaments  illustrated  in 
PI.  LXXVIII,  I,  2 show. 

Beads,  it  is  true,  were  discovered  in  large  quantities,  but  these  came  from  the  quarters  of 
the  craftsmen  who  made  them  and  were  not  necessarily  intended  for  people  of  substance  in 
the  city  itself.  Chanhu-daro  was  undoubtedly  a great  bead-making  centre,  which  supplied 
many  more  prosperous  communities,  perhaps  in  Sumer  itself,  and  the  best  examples  of  the 
craft  were  obviously  reserved  for  export. 

Coffer  or  Bronze  Bracelets 

These  are  quite  common  and  are  of  three  distinct  types: 

(a)  Those  made  from  stout  rods  or  wire,  round  in  section  (Pis.  LXII,  5,  LXVI,  2,  8-1 1, 
LXIX,  II,  LXXIII,  19,23,24,29,  LXXV,  II,  12,  LXXVI,  19,20). 

(b)  Those  made  from  half-round  rods  or  wire  (Pis.  LXII,  6,  LXVII,  4,  5). 

(c)  Those  made  from  thin  sheeting  and  U-shaped  in  section  (Pis.  LXXIII,  30, 
LXXVI,  21). 

Bracelets  of  Type  (a)  are  by  far  the  most  common,  the  round  copper  or  bronze  rods 
out  of  which  they  are  made  ranging  from  0.13  to  0.27  inches  in  diameter. 

Type  (b),  however,  is  distinctly  rare  and  only  three  examples,  two  of  which  are 
illustrated,  have  been  found.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  the  rods  from  which  these  bangles 


190 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


191 

were  made  were  half-round  in  the  first  place,  or  the  flattening,  always  to  be  seen  on  the 
inside  of  the  bracelet,  came  from  being  shaped  on  a mandrel. 

Type  (c)  is  complex  in  workmanship  compared  with  the  other  two.  Specimens 
belonging  to  it  seem  to  have  been  constructed  out  of  circular  pieces  of  flat  sheeting,  about 
0.02  inch  thick,  which  was  worked  into  a U form,  the  open  end  of  the  section  being  always 
on  the  inside.  This  type  of  bangle  was  probably  shaped  by  hammer  and  chisel  on  a bitumen 
support,  and  when  it  was  finished  its  hollow  interior  was  probably  filled  with  a resinous 
substance  to  prevent  buckling.  Owing  to  the  thinness  of  the  metal  employed,  articles  of  this 
type  are  generally  badly  preserved.  Fragments  of  two,  if  not  three,  of  these  were  found 
adhering  to  the  dish  in  Pi.  LXVII,  2 and  averaged  0.19  by  0.13  inches  in  section.  Another 
bangle  made  in  the  same  way  (No.  2529,  T,  a)  was  of  very  much  the  same  size  in  section; 
this  last  came  to  light  with  the  examples  of  Types  (a)  and  (b)  shown  in  Pi.  LXII,  5, 6. 
Bracelets  belonging  to  these  three  categories  have  diameter  measurements  varying  from  1.7 
to  2.8  inches,  but  the  specimen  illustrated  in  PI.  LXXIII,  30  and  again  in  Pi.  LXXVI,  21  is 
of  exceptional  size  (2.9  ins.).  This  last  belongs  to  Type  (c)  and  must  either  have  been 
made  for  a man  or  worn  as  an  armlet. 

The  ends  of  most  of  the  bracelets  were  found  open  and  appear  to  have  been  worn  in 
this  condition.  The  bangles  shown  in  Pis.  LXVI,  2, 1 1 and  LXIX,  1 1 are  so  small,  however, 
that  they  were  probably  made  for  children.  No  joint  can  he  seen  in  the  Type  (a)  bangle  in 
PI.  LXVI,  9 (see  also  Pi.  LXXV,  ii)  nor  in  that  shown  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  30  and  again  in 
PI.  LXXVI,  21 . An  opening  in  this  last  Type  (c)  example  cannot  be  expected,  seeing  that  it 
was  made  in  a different  way  to  the  others. 

Type  (c)  is  unknown  at  Mohenjo-daro,  but  the  other  two  kinds  were  quite  common. 
There,  however,  it  was  Type  (b)  not  Type  (a)  that  was  the  most  well  favoured. 

Faience  Bracelets  (Pis.  LXXVU,  2-5, 8,  to,  XC,  35-38) 

Owing  to  their  fragile  nature,  bracelets  of  this  description  are  never  found  intact. 
Their  pieces  have  been  discovered  over  various  parts  of  Mound  II  and  they  are  just  as 
common  in  the  upper  as  in  the  lower  levels.  Exactly  similar  fragments,  both  in  make 
and  in  the  patterns  incised  upon  them,  are  known  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  also  at  Lohumjo- 
daro,  another  site  in  Sindh. ^ 

These  faience  bangles  were  made  in  moulds  and  formed  of  a soft,  light  grey  paste 
coated  with  a thick  glaze,  which  in  most  cases  has  lost  its  colour.  Nos.  37  and  38  in 
Pi.  XC  (the  latter  being  shown  in  line  in  Pi.  LXXVII,  10)  are  now  pale  blue.  Nos.  2,  3,  5,  8 
in  PL  LXXVII  and  No.  36  in  PL  XC  are  light  green,  while  the  remaining  specimens  are  now 
cream  colour.  No.  4 in  PL  LXXVII,  the  only  example  with  a hard  core,  is  made  of  a paste 
which  has  an  addition  of  a certain  amount  of  glaze  and  was  converted  by  firing  into  a hard 
vitreous  substance  not  unlike  glass  in  appearance  and  of  a uniform  tint  throughout.  This 
particular  specimen  is  of  an  apple-green  colour  inside,  though  its  surface  has  faded  to  a 
dull  white.  Both  methods  of  making  these  bangles  were  also  practised  at  Mohenjo-daro 
and  the  same  technique  was  also  adopted  in  bead-making. 

^ Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXXIII,  6,  6a. 


192 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Although  No.  10  in  PL  LXXVII  (see  also  Pi.  XC,  38)  is  distinctly  oval  in  section, 
most  of  these  bangles  are  semi-circular  in  this  respect  and  average  o.  1 5 in.  wide  and  o.  1 8 in. 
thick.  All  are  decorated  in  some  w'ay,  the  most  common  device  being  two  parallel  lines  of 
notching  round  the  circumference  (PL  LXXVII,  2,  3,  5,  8).  The  chevron  pattern  seen  in 
PL  LXXVII,  10  (see  also  PL  XC,  38)  is  also  known  on  similar  bracelets  from  Mohenjo-daro.^ 

Shell  Bracelets  (Pis.  LXXVII,  6, 7,  XC,  75) 

These  are  rather  uncommon,  for  shell-working  was  not  a craft  that  w^as  extensively 
practised  at  Chanhu-daro.  The  material  used  was  the  univalve  shown  in  PL  XC,  i.^ 

The  four  bracelets  illustrated  in  Pl.XC,  15  are  unfinished.  They  have  all  been  sawn 
from  the  same  part  of  the  shell,  but  because  the  shell  tapered  a little  and  a coarse  saw  was 
used,  the  diameter  measurement,  which  averages  2.2  to  2.65  inches  inside,  varies  slightly  in 
each  specimen.  The  bangles,  which  are  oval  in  shape,  are  also  irregular  in  section,  but  this 
last  unavoidable  defect  would  have  been  remedied  to  some  extent  if  they  had  been  smoothed 
over  and  polished. 

The  small  fragment.  No.  6 in  PL  LXXVII,  is  decorated  with  two  deep  grooves  round 
the  circumference.  A small  hole  at  one  end  has  obviously  been  made  in  an  attempt  to 
repair  the  bracelet  to  which  this  piece  once  belonged.  No.  7 in  the  same  plate  is  also 
ornamented  in  this  way  but  with  the  addition  of  incised  markings  at  the  base  of  the  grooves. 

Pottery  Bracelets  (Pis.  LXXVII,  p,  11-13,  26-29,  34>  39^  4°) 

In  spite  of  their  crudeness,  some  of  these  bangles  are  of  considerable  interest.  The 
plain  varieties,  four  of  which  are  illustrated  in  Pi.  XC,  26-29,  ^re  made  from  rounded  strips 
of  clay  with  the  ends  roughly  joined  together,  little  or  no  attempt  having  been  made  to 
conceal  the  unions.  Very  few  of  these  bracelets  are  symmetrical  and  none  of  them  bears  a 
slip  or  wash  of  any  kind.  They  average  2.4  inches  in  diameter  outside  and  are  just  large 
enough  to  slip  over  a woman’s  hand.  Ornaments,  if  one  may  so  call  them,  of  this  kind  were 
also  worn  at  Mohenjo-daro,'*  but  at  Chanhu-daro  they  were  far  more  common. 

A singular  specimen,  hitherto  quite  unknown  to  us,  appears  in  PL  XC,  34.  This 
measures  2.26  inches  wide,  2.7  inches  in  diameter,  and  is  made  up  of  seven  bracelets  of  the 
type  described  above,  arranged  so  that  their  joints  are  in  line.  On  the  inside  this  bracelet 
is  slightly  oval  and  measures  1.93  by  1.8  inches  each  way,  while  the  segments  composing 
it  are  round  in  section,  averaging  0.31  inches  in  diameter.  When  a bracelet  of  this  type 
first  came  to  light  it  was  thought  that  some  bangles  had  become  accidentally  united  in  the 
kiln,  but  this  supposition  proved  false  when  other  examples  turned  up  in  various  parts  of 
the  site,  all  made  in  the  same  way,  although  the  number  of  rings  varied  in  each  case.® 

= F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXL,  58. 

^ Mur  ex  (Chicoreus)  ramosus,  Linn. 

* M.  1.  C.,  p.  530,  pi.  CLII,  I j . 

^ For  another  bracelet  of  this  type  from  Chanhu-daro,  see  Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind, 
pi.  XVII,  40. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


193 


Two  examples  of  another  new  and  very  curious  bracelet  are  shown  in  Pis.  LXXVII, 
9,  XC,  39, 40.  These  are  almost  round  in  section,  have  no  slip  or  paint,  and  are  crudely 
ornamented  with  deep  finger  impressions  round  their  circumferences.  Nothing  like  them 
has  been  found  elsewhere;  they  appear  to  be  a local  product.  No.  39  measures  0.25  inch 
wide  by  0.28  inch  thick,  and  No.  40  (which  appears  again  in  line  in  PI.  LXXVII,  9)  is 
0.43  inch  wide  by  0.44  inch  thick. 

Specimens  of  a third  type  are  illustrated  in  PI.  LXXVII,  11-13.  These,  however,  are 
far  more  carefully  finished  than  the  bracelets  described  above,  and  all  of  them  are  decorated 
with  transverse  markings  in  dark  or  light  red  paint  that  has  not  always  been  carefully 
applied.  No.  ii  is  flat  in  section,  measuring  0.35  inch  wide,  0.12  inch  thick  on  the  outer 
side  and  0.26  inch  thick  on  the  inner.  It  is  coated  with  a pink  slip  and  is  decorated  on 
both  sides,  as  the  illustration  shows,  with  a pattern  in  dark-red  paint.  No.  1 2 has  no  slip, 
but  is  irregularly  ornamented  on  both  sides  with  red  lines.  This  specimen  resembles  No.  1 1 
in  section,  its  inside  measurement  is  0.18  inch  in  thickness,  graduating  down  to  0.12  inch 
on  the  outside.  No.  13  is  round  in  section  (0.32  inch  in  diameter),  and  is  carefully  made 
and  finished,  the  outside  edge  being  adorned  with  dark  red  stripes  applied  on  a slip  of 
yellowish-pink. 

All  these  bracelets  appear  to  have  been  made  of  ordinary  clay,  identical  with  that  used 
for  the  pottery,  but  it  is  difficult  to  explain  why  so  many  of  them  are  of  such  bad  workman- 
ship. Poverty  cannot  be  pleaded  as  an  excuse,  for  the  material  was  there  for  the  asking  and 
ornaments  of  this  kind  could  have  been  made  just  as  well  at  home  as  in  a potter’s  workshop. 
A theory  that  has  been  put  forward  is  that  the  coarser  type  of  bangle  was  venerated  in 
some  way  and  perhaps  issued  to  pilgrims  after  a visit  to  some  sacred  shrine  or  temple. 

Rings  (Pis.  LXXIU,  9-1 2, 20, 21,  LXXX1X,8) 

The  copper  or  bronze  rings  in  Pi.  LXXIII  may  have  served  as  earrings,  finger-rings,  or 
toe-rings,  and  fall  into  two  main  categories,  “ plain  ” and  “ coiled.”  The  former  is  the  more 
common  of  the  two,  but  both  types  occur  comparatively  rarely  at  Indus  Valley  sites,  because 
metal  rings  are  not  objects  that  are  easily  lost  or  broken. 

No  gold  or  sih'er  rings  were  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro,  not  because  such  objects  were 
not  made,  but  because  they  probably  represented  the  portable  capital  of  their  owners  and, 
as  mentioned  earlier  in  this  chapter,  were  removed  when  the  city  was  deserted. 

Two  examples  of  the  “ plain  ” rings  are  shown  in  Pi.  LXXIII,  20,  21.  Both  have  slightly 
tapered  ends  like  those  of  the  bangles,  and  are  fashioned  out  of  round  wire,  0.12  inch  in 
diameter.  Another  ring,  which  is  not  illustrated,  is  made  of  a piece  of  wnre  o.  1 1 inch 
square  in  section.®  These  plain  rings  occasionally  have  ends  that  overlap  a little,  but 
generally  they  merely  touch. 

Rings  of  the  coiled  type  (Pi.  LXXIII,  9-12)  are  by  far  the  most  ornamental.  Nos.  9 
and  II  are  made  of  round  wire,  o.i  and  0.07  inches  in  diameter  respectively.  No.  10  is 
fashioned  out  of  half-round  wire  measuring  o.  i inch  wide  and  0.05  inch  thick,  w'hile  that 

No.  3158,  from  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  175,  lev.  + 7.9  ft. 


194 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


composing  No.  12  is  slightly  oval  in  section.  All  these  specimens  are  undoubtedly  finger- 
rings,  for  they  are  too  wide  to  have  been  carried  in  the  ears.  Similar  rings  to  these,  made 
in  gold,  silver  and  copper,  were  very  popular  in  Sumer  at  a time  contemporary  with  the 
Harappa  Culture.”  They  have  also  been  found  on  Persian  sites  of  about  the  same  period 
as  well  as  on  those  of  earlier  date.® 

A ring  in  pottery  is  shown  in  PI.  LXXXIX,  8.  This  bears  traces  of  a polished  red 
surface.  It  is  0.91  inch  in  diameter  and  its  joint  is  rather  rough.  Rings  in  this  easily 
broken  material  are  decidedly  rare. 


Fillet  (PI  LXVlll,  14}®* 

The  sole  example  of  a fillet  so  far  discovered  consists  of  a thin  band  of  copper,  now 
only  3.45  inches  long,  the  greater  part  of  it  being  missing.  Originallv  it  must  have  been 
worn  round  the  fore-head  and  secured  by  strings  tied  at  the  back  of  the  head.  Very  similar 
ornaments  made  in  silver  and  gold  have  come  to  light  at  Alohenjo-daro.®  Fillets  of  the  same 
form  are  well  known  at  Kish  and  Ur  in  Mesopotamia  as  well  as  at  Tepe  Hissar  in  Persia.^® 
The  Indian  examples  as  well  as  those  from  the  countries  I have  named  are  frequently 
stiffened  with  punch  markings  or  devices  embossed  on  the  thin  metal. 


Pins  (Pis.  LXVn,  13,  LXVlll,  9,  LXIX,  s-10,  LXXll,  21,22,  LXXV,  6,  LXXVl,  22-24, 
LXXXIX,  s) 


The  pins  recovered  from  Chanbu-daro  are  made  in  copper  or  bronze  with  the  exception 
of  one  in  ivory  shown  in  PI.  LXXXIX,  5.  This  last  has  lost  its  point  and  is  now  1.7 
inches  long. 

The  simplest  type  of  pin  appears  in  Pis.  LXVII,  13  and  LXIX,  6.  The  first  was  found 
with  a number  of  copper  and  bronze  objects  and  its  finish,  to  say  nothing  of  its  very  definite 
head,  prevent  it  from  being  classed  as  an  awl.  No.  6 in  PI.  LXIX,  which  has  lost  its  point, 
is  a plain  round  rod  of  copper. 

The  type  most  commonly  found  at  Chanhu-daro  is  illustrated  in  Pis.  LXIX,  5,  7-10, 
LXXII,  21, 22,  LXXVl,  22-24,  was  made  by  thinning  out  one  end  of  a copper  rod  and 
then  coiling  it  downwards  to  form  a head.  Curiously  enough,  only  one  specimen  of  this 
type  of  pin  has  turned  up  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  that  in  a very  low  level,''^  while,  so  far  as  the 
writer  is  aware,  nothing  like  it  has  ever  been  unearthed  in  other  settlements  of  the 
Harappa  Culture. 

This  type  of  pin,  together  with  one  very  similar,  whose  coiled  head  is  made  of  flattened. 


^ Woolley,  Antiquaries  Jotirnal,  vol.  XII,  p.  368. 

® E.  F.  Schmidt,  “ Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  The  Museum  Journal,  Univ.  Mus.,  p.  381,  pis. 
CVCa),CXXI(b,d). 

This  object  was  inadvertently  omitted  from  the  drawing  for  this  plate. 

^ M.  I.  C.,  p.  527,  pi.  CLI,  a,  4,  5;  F.  E.  M.,  pp.  526,  529;  pi.  CXXXV,  4. 

E.  F.  Schmidt,  “ Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  pi.  CXXII  (a,  d). 

“ F.  E.  M.,  p.  539,  pi.  C,  4.  This  pin  provides  further  evidence  that  the  lower  levels  of  the  city 
are  contemporary  with  the  upper  levels  of  Chanhu-daro. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


195 


not  round  wire,  has  a tremendous  geographical  range.  It  has  come  to  light  in  Bronze  Age 
Germany  and  Bulgaria;  “ at  Troy  (first  and  second  cities);  “ in  Predynastic  Egypt;  “ and 
in  Mesopotamia  and  Persia,^®  including  the  Caucasus.  Why  the  type  should  be  so  common 
at  Chanhu-daro  and  so  rare  at  Mohenjo-daro  cannot  at  present  be  explained.  At  the  former 
site  it  occurs  at  levels  ranging  from  +0.05  to  +21.5  feet,  the  latter  figure,  of  course, 
being  well  in  the  Jhukar  Period. 

Altogether  four  of  these  pins  were  found  in  the  Jhukar  levels  of  Mound  II  (Pis. 
LXIX,  5,  LXXII,  21, 22,"  and  the  supposition  is  that  they  were  made  in  that  period  as  well 
as  in  the  one  before.  In  all  probability  this  type  of  pin  was  introduced  into  India  from 
either  Mesopotamia  or  Persia  at  about  3000-2500  b.  c. 

Only  one  example  was  found  of  the  double-coiled  pin  shown  in  Pis.  LXVIII,  9 and 
LXXV,  6.  It  has  no  counterpart  yet  at  Mohenjo-daro  or  in  any  other  city  inhabited  by  the 
Harappa  people,  and  is  made  of  one  piece  of  metal,  the  split  ends  of  which  were  carefully 
fined  down  and  then  twisted  into  two  opposite  coils,  i . 1 5 inches  in  total  width.  Specimens 
of  this  type  have  been  discovered  in  ancient  settlements  as  remote  as  Germany  and  other 
parts  of  Europe.^®  One  pin  of  this  type  has  turned  up  at  Anau,^®  quite  a number  at  Tepe 
Hissar  in  Western  Persia,  all  dated  to  the  Hissar  II  Period^®  and  Troy  has  produced  a 
number  of  specimens.  Two  have  come  to  light  at  Sialk  in  Kashan.^' 

Eleine-Geldern  inclines  to  the  view  that  the  beginnings  of  the  Elissar  II  Period  reach 
back  at  least  to  the  beginning  of  the  second  millennium,  if  not  to  the  late  centuries  of 
the  third  millennium  b.  c."  If  the  last  be  correct,  our  Ghanhu-daro  specimen,  which 
certainly  belongs  to  the  Harappa  Period,  can  be  linked  with  the  Hissar  II  pins.  As  the 
type  is  unknown  in  Mesopotamia  it  presumably  reached  India  by  the  overland  route  through 
Baluchistan,  although  no  examples  of  it  have,  up  to  the  present,  been  reported  as  coming 
from  that  country. 

Jhukar  Pins  (Pi  LXXU,  18-22) 

The  first  three  copper  or  bronze  pins  are  interesting,  as  nothing  like  them  has  as  yet 
appeared  in  any  other  Indian  site.  For  this  reason  and  also  because  the  chevron  pattern,  a 
decorative  feature  of  much  of  the  Jhukar  potterj'  (PI.  XLII,  11-13,  15-18),  occurs  on  two 

Efiert,  Reallexikon  Der  Vorgeschichte,  vol.  8,  pis.  75,  93. 

Schliemann,  Troja,  p.  139,  nos.  62,  63. 

Petrie  and  Quibell,  JSagada  and  Balias,  pi.  LXV,  15;  Brunton,  Mostagedda,  pis.  XL,  42,  43, 
XLIII,  25-27;  Childe,  Most  Ancient  East  (2nd  Edition),  p.  72,  fig.  22. 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  p.  310,  pi.  231;  Preusser,  Tell  Asmar  and  Khafaje,  fig.  52. 

Speiser,  Excavations  at  Tepe  Gawra,  p.  no,  pi.  LXXXII,  14,  16. 

^■^The  fourth  (No.  1349)  was  found  in  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  -(-  21.5  ft.  It  measures  3.3  inches 
in  length  and  0.18  in.  in  diameter. 

Ebert,  Reallexikon  Der  Vorgeschichte,  vol.  8,  pis.  131,  132,  140;  Peet,  Stone  and  Bronze  Ages 
in  Italy,  p.  351,  fig-  184. 

Pumpelly,  Excavations  in  Turkestan,  I,  p.  152. 

E.  F.  Schmidt,  “ Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,  pi.  CIV  (c). 

R.  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  de  Sialk,  vol.  I,  pis.  XXIX,  b,  XCV,  a,  e. 

“ Archaeological  Traces  of  the  Vedic  Aryans  Journ.  Ind.  Soc.  Orient  Art.,  vol.  IV,  no.  2,  p.  94. 


196 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


of  them,  it  seems  probable  that  they  are  products  of  that  period.  Nos.  18  and  19  came  from 
levels  where  Jhukar  material  was  beginning  to  appear  in  abundance,  while  No.  20  was 
found  high  up  in  the  “ Cutting,”  having  no  doubt  been  washed  down  from  above. 

No.  18  is  6.38  inches  long  and  has  a square  shoulder  measuring  0.3  X o.  27  inch. 
The  rounded  head  is  0.29  inch  in  diameter  and  on  two  sides  of  the  shoulder  traces  of 
an  incised  decoration  can  just  be  made  out.  The  other  two  sides  were  probably  ornamented 
in  the  same  manner,  but  no  markings  can  now  be  seen. 

No.  19  is  a similar  but  better  finished  object.  It  is  4.3  inches  long  and  bears  an  incised 
chevron  pattern  on  one  side  of  its  shoulder,  which  measures  0.23  inches  square. 

The  nearest  approach  to  this  type  of  pin  is  a specimen  from  Tepe  Sialk  assigned  to 
Period  IV  of  that  site.^^ 

No.  20,  which  has  unfortunately  lost  its  point,  is  now  4.97  inches  long  and  has  an 
elaborately  decorated  flat  head  measuring  0.6  inches  square.  Incised  on  this  is  a four- 
petalled  design  following  the  outline  of  the  head,  with  circle  and  dot  motifs,  apparently 
cut  with  a drill,  ornamenting  the  angles  and  centre  of  the  pattern.  The  lower  rounded  part 
of  this  specimen  is  o.  i inches  in  diameter. 

It  is  still  a matter  of  conjecture  whether  these  pins  were  worn  in  the  hair  or  used  to 
fasten  garments,  nor  can  any  information  on  this  point  be  gained  from  the  figurines.  A 
hair  pin  is,  however,  certainly  indicated  on  a statue  head  of  a man  in  limestone  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro.^^ 

Comh  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  12,  XC1,4) 

This  fine  ivory  comb,  which  was  found  in  pieces,  now  measures  1.79  inches  long 
by  0.2  inch  thick.  It  is  decorated  on  both  sides  with  an  identical  pattern  of  roundels  and 
has  been  very  carefully  made,  though  the  teeth  are  rather  roughly  cut.^‘  This  object  is 
not  unlike  one  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro.^®  The  fact  that  a comb  came  to  light  near  the 
head  of  a female  body  at  Mohenjo-daro  would  indicate  that  these  articles  were  actually 
worn  in  the  hair. 

Bullae  (PI  LXXXVIU,  1-3) 

These  strange  objects  were  quite  common  at  Mohenjo-daro.'^  They  appear  to  be 
copies  of  stitched  leather  amulet  cases  and  were  probably  valued  as  amulets  as  well  as 
ornaments.  Bullae  of  this  description  are  invariably  made  of  pottery  and  decorated  on  one 
side  only.  Of  the  specimens  illustrated  only  No.  i is  coated  with  a slip,  in  this  case  red. 
All  are  perforated  with  two  holes  by  which  they  could  be  hung  from  the  neck  or  attached 
to  the  clothing. 

R.  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  de  Sialk,  Vol.  I,  pi.  XCV,  c. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XCIX,  5,  6. 

These  were  made  with  a saw. 

=•=  F.  E.  M.,  p.  542,  pis.  XCI,  26,  CXXV,  24. 

Op.  cit.,  p.  524,  pis.  LXXI,  14,  CXXXVI,  80,  CXL,  34,  CXLII,  i,  2, 4. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


197 


No.  I is  1.5  inches  in  diameter,  0.22  inch  thick,  and  has  a flat,  oval  slip  of  clay  just 
below  its  two  holes,  though  why  this  was  added  here  is  difficult  to  say.  It  is  ornamented 
with  a double  row  of  pittings  round  its  margin  which,  however,  do  not  perforate  it.  No.  2 
is  of  the  same  thickness  and  averages  1.36  inches  in  diameter;  its  stitch  markings  are  very 
irregular.  The  two  holes  by  which  it  was  suspended  have  been  strengthened  by  a thin 
strip  of  clay.  No.  3 has  only  a single  row  of  stitching. 

Button-ornaments  (Pis.  LXXV//Z,  3-7, 9, 72-15,  EXXXVJ/Z,  5) 

The  most  popular  type  of  button,  one  that  was  equally  common  at  Mohenjo-daro,  is 
that  shown  in  Pi.  LXXVIII,  14.  This  specimen  is  i.o  inch  in  diameter  and  0.2  inch  thick 
and  is  made  of  steatite,  the  usual  material.  In  its  base  are  two  converging  holes  by  which 
it  could  be  secured  to  a garment.  Buttons  of  exactly  the  same  pattern  have  been  found  on 
many  ancient  sites  from  Persia  to  places  as  far  afield  as  Western  Europe. 

Another  type  of  button,  much  favoured  at  Chanhu-daro  but  somewhat  rare  at  Mohenjo- 
daro,"®  is  shown  in  Pi.  LXXVIII,  3-7,  and  occurs  in  two  varieties,  “ plain  ” and  “ knobbed.” 
These  were  shaped  in  a mould,  but  before  they  were  glazed,  their  flat  bases  were  roughly 
scooped  out,  leaving  behind  a bar  of  the  material  to  bridge  the  hollow  thus  formed.  Lastly 
this  bridge  was  perforated  laterally  to  take  a fastening  or  thread.  Nos.  5-7  clearly  show  in 
what  a perfunctor}'  manner  this  hollowing  was  done;  the  reverse  side  of  these  ornaments 
was  evidently  not  intended  to  be  seen.  Nos.  3,  5-7  are  of  an  apple-green  shade,  and  though 
No.  4 has  lost  its  colour  and  is  now  white  it  still  retains  its  glaze. 

No.  9 in  Pi.  LXXVIII  is  a small  button  of  steatite  with  a perforated  projection  at  the 
base  to  secure  it  to  clothing.  In  colour  it  is  now  white,  but  yellow  patches  here  and  there 
are  remains  of  a decomposed  glaze.  A second  specimen  of  much  the  same  type  appears  in 
PI.  LXXXVIII,  5.  This  is  made  of  pottery  and  is  1.8  inches  in  diameter  and  0.7  inch  in 
thickness.  Round  its  margin  is  a single  row  of  indentations  which,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
bullae  already  described,  may  be  intended  to  represent  stitching.  No.  1 3 in  Pi.  LXXVIII 
is  a simple  button  made  in  shell  and  measuring  1.2  inches  in  diameter  and  0.25  inch  thick. 
Originally  it  had  only  two  holes  in  the  middle,  in  the  modern  manner,  but  subsequently 
others  were  bored,  two  of  which  are  broken. 

Nos.  12  and  15  in  Pi.  LXXVIII  represent  a new  type.  The  first  is  in  faience  and 
bears  a glaze  that  has  now  faded  to  cream.  It  measures  0.60  inch  long  and  the  edge  of  its 
slightly  concave  base  is  bored  with  two  holes  as  shown  in  the  line  drawing.  No.  1 5,  also 
in  faience,  is  better  finished  and  is  decorated  with  an  incised  chevron  design  similar  to  that 
on  the  metal  pins  in  Pi.  LXXII,  18, 19.  This  chevron  motif  was,  as  we  have  seen,  a 
favourite  pottery  motif  in  the  Jhukar  Period  and  this,  taken  with  the  fact  that  both  these 
specimens  come  from  high  levels,  makes  it  probable  that  these  two  buttons  are  of  Jhukar 
workmanship. 

Nose  or  Ear  Ornaments  (Pi.  LXXVIII,  8, 10,  ii,  16) 

Except  for  the  absence  of  a small  head  at  the  end  of  the  shank.  No.  8 resembles  a 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CLV,  5;  F.  E.  M.,  p.  542;  pis.  XCI,  29, 30,  CXXV,  23. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


198 

type  of  faience  plug  that  was  common  at  Mohenjo-daro."®  Light  green  in  colour  and  0.8 
inch  in  diameter,  the  moulded  face  of  this  object  bears  the  divided  circle  design,  which 
almost  invariably  appears  on  ornaments  of  this  sort  as  well  as  on  the  painted  potterj^ 

Nos.  10,  II,  and  16  are  also  in  faience;  the  glaze  of  the  first  has  turned  to  a cream 
colour.  None  of  these  plugs  has  a head  at  the  end  of  its  stem  but  the  slightly  concave  sides 
were  probably  sufficient  to  keep  it  in  position  in  the  nose  or  ear.  No.  1 6,  which  measures 
0.84  inch  in  diameter,  has  a curious  serrated  edge,  which  possibly  prevented  it  from  turning 
round  when  set  in  place. 

Head-cones  (Pis.  XXlX,6y,68[]h.ukar];  XC,  11, 12  [Harap^a  Period]) 

No.  67  is  in  perfect  condition  and  is  in  faience  coated  with  a thick  light  green  glaze. 
It  measures  2.3  inches  high  and  1.3  inches  in  diameter  and  the  depth  of  its  interior  is 
0.98  inch.  Six  holes,  more  or  less  regularly  spaced  and  averaging  0.12  inch  in  diameter, 
pierce  the  lower  edge  of  this  rather  roughly  made  object.  The  second  cone.  No.  68,  was 
found  with  a small  collection  of  glazed  beads  of  indifferent  workmanship,  one  of  which  is 
illustrated  in  PI.  LXXXVII,  7,  a.  The  upper  part  of  this  object  is  missing  and  it  now 
measures  2.8  inches  in  height;  its  hollow  interior  is  1.48  inches  deep.  Like  No.  67  it  has 
six  small  holes  round  its  lower  edge. 

The  above  two  cones,  both  of  which  are  roughly  made  and  glazed,  are  undoubtedly 
of  Jhukar  manufacture.  They  were  probably  sewn  to  a head-dress  and  are  not  unlike  certain 
copper,  silver  and  gold  head-ornaments  that  have  been  found  at  XIohenjo-daro.®® 

The  three  shell  segments.  Nos.  5,  ii,  12  in  Pl.XC,  come  from  a type  of  cone  of 
which  numerous,  but  rarely  perfect,  examples  have  been  found  in  the  cities  of  the  Harappa 
people.®^  Two  of  these  segments  (Nos.  5 and  ii)  fit  together  to  form  part  of  a cone  1.2 
inches  in  height  and  3 inches  in  diameter;  a third  piece  which  would  complete  this  cone 
is  missing.  No.  12  comes  from  another  cone  which  is  estimated  to  have  been  i.o  inch 
high  and  2.78  inches  in  diameter. 

It  is  not  yet  known  how  these  segments  were  joined  together.  They  have  no  holes, 
and  metal  fastenings  would  therefore  appear  unlikely.  Possibly  a cement,  such  as  shellac, 
was  used.  The  marginal  incised  lines  round  these  pieces  were  filled  in  with  a red-coloured 
pigment,  a usual  procedure  with  objects  of  this  kind. 

Metal  Ornaments  (Pi.  LXXVIII,  i,  2) 

No.  I is  a ver)^  unusual  ornament  and  may  have  been  a pendant.  Its  overall  measure- 
ments are  1.61  inches  high,  1.31  inches  wide,  and  0.62  inches  thick.  The  copper 
cone-shaped  portions  are  separated  from  one  another  by  copper  and  white  steatite  disc-shaped 
beads.  A similar  arrangement  of  larger  beads  projects  from  the  top  of  the  ornament.  Each 
set  of  cones  and  beads  is  kept  in  place  by  a copper  wire,  the  two  ends  of  which  pass  through 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  532,  pis.  C,  12,  CXXXVI,  90, 91. 

M.  1.  C.,  p.  519,  pi.  CXLVIII,  A(2);  F.  E.  M.,  p.  529,  pis.  CV,  22,  CXXIV,  30,  CXXXV,  7. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CLVI,  13,  16,  17;  E.  E.  M.,  pis.  CV,  42,  CXXV,  28. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


199 


two  thin  copper  plates  at  the  hase,  are  then  brought  upwards  through  the  cones,  next 
through  an  upper  plate,  which  is  eight-shaped,  and  finally  end  somewhere  in  the  beads  on 
the  top.  The  whole  affair  is  very  carefully  made  and  quite  probably  the  copper  parts  were 
once  gilt. 

No.  2 in  Pi.  LXXVIII  is  made  up  of  tvi-o  bell-shaped  pieces  of  thin  beaten  copper, 
0.39  inches  in  length  and  0.65  inches  in  diameter,  joined  together  by  a thin  copper  rod, 
0.06  inch  thick.  Strung  on  this  connecting  piece  is  a cylindrical  copper  bead,  which  may 
once  have  had  beads  of  a contrasting  colour  on  either  side  of  it.  A fragment  of  a second 
ornament  of  the  same  kind  adheres  to  the  lower  bell. 

This  ornament,  which  possibly  represents  two  flowers  of  the  convolvulus  type,  may 
have  been  suspended  from  its  central  bar,  now  slightly  out  of  shape.  It  is  a beautiful 
example  of  fine  metal-work  and  bears  no  resemblance  to  anything  found  at  Mohenjo-daro. 
Elower-shaped  ornaments  are  characteristic  of  much  of  the  material  discovered  in  the  Royal 
Tombs  at  Ur,  so  it  is  possible  that  this  Chanhu-daro  ornament  is  a copy  of  the  work  of 
some  Sumerian  jeweller.  As  already  mentioned,  there  were  originally  two  of  these  articles, 
only  one  of  which  has  survived  intact;  it  is  likely  they  were  intended  to  be  worn  as  earrings. 

BEADS 

A description  of  the  materials  from  which  the  beads  shown  in  Pis.  LXXX-LXXXV  and 
LXXXVII  are  made  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  this  book.  All  the  beads,  except  when 
otherwise  shown  or  stated,  are  round  in  section  and  excepting  those  in  PI.  LXXIX  are  drawn 
to  full  scale.  As  many  of  them  represent  types  well  known  at  XIohenjo-daro,  it  has  been 
thought  necessar}^  only  to  describe  the  rare  examples,  especially  those  which  are  peculiar  to 
Chanhu-daro.  Some  of  the  most  popular  northern  varieties,  curiously  enough,  have  never 
come  to  light  on  this  site.  For  example,  the  favourite  Mohenjo-daro  bead-types— “ cog- 
wheel,” “ tubular  denticulate,”  and  ” fluted  tapered  ” do  not  seem  to  have  been  made  or 
worn  at  Chanhu-daro  at  all;  on  the  other  hand,  some  beads  from  that  city  apparently  occur 
nowhere  else.  All  these  localized  products  are  in  the  softer  materials,  such  as  faience  and 
steatite,  and  were  evidently  made  to  oblige  the  prevailing  fashion  in  each  particular 
settlement. 

Decorated  Carnelian  Beads  (PL  LXXIX,  1-16) 

Among  the  numerous  specimens  of  this  type  of  head  many  were  found  unfinished, 
broken  in  boring,  or  rejected  on  account  of  bad  colour  and  the  like,  thus  proving  that  they 
were  actually  made  at  Chanhu-daro  and  not  imported. 

Xlr.  Horace  Beck  in  a most  interesting  article  on  the  subject  of  these  heads,^^  places 
them  under  the  following  three  headings: 

F.  E.M.,  pp.  509,  511,  515. 

Antiquaries  Journal,  vol.  XIII,  pp.  384-398. 


200 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(I)  White  on  red.  The  most  common  type. 

(II)  Black  on  a white  coloured  base  (found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  Taxila,  Baluchistan, 
Tell  Asmar,  and  Ur). 

(Ill)  Black  on  a red  ground  (found  at  Taxila  and  Harappa). 

Only  specimens  of  the  first  two  types  have  come  to  light  at  Chanhu-daro,  Nos.  1-5, 
7-9,  II,  13,  15,  16  in  Pi.  LXXIX  coming  under  Type  I,  and  Nos.  6,  10,  12,  14  under 
Type  II.  Examples  of  the  more  common  Type  I (i.  e.,  white  on  red  variety)  have  been 
unearthed  at  various  sites  in  India  as  well  as  in  Mesopotamia  at  Tell  Asmar  and  Ur.^“ 
Other  examples  come  from  Nineveh,^®  while  Tepe  Hissar  in  Western  Persia  has  also 
provided  several. All  these  foreign  examples  bear  the  same  devices  as  those  appearing  on 
the  early  Indian  beads,  and  all  are  approximately  of  the  same  date. 

Only  one  specimen  belonging  to  Type  II  has  appeared  at  Mohenjo-daro^®  and  it  is 
equally  rare  at  Harappa.  Four  beads,  three  of  them  broken,  have  turned  up  at  Chanhu-daro 
(Nos.  6,  10,  12,  14),  all  of  which  were  evidently  throw-outs. 

Neither  Chanhu-daro  nor  Mohenjo-daro  has,  as  yet,  produced  the  very  rare  Type  III, 
with  its  pattern  painted  in  black  directly  on  the  natural  red  surface  of  the  carnelian.  A 
specimen,  as  yet  unpublished,  is  reported  by  Beck  as  coming  from  Harappa  and  a second 
has  been  found  at  Taxila.  The  latter  is  dated  to  the  First  Centur)'  a.  d.,  some  2500  years 
later  than  the  former,  but  there  remains  the  possibility  that  it  is  a more  ancient  bead  that 
had  been  picked  up  and  worn  again. 

The  patterns  on  the  Type  I beads  were  made  by  using  for  paint  an  alkali,  such  as 
carbonate  of  soda,  and  then  fixing  it  by  heat.  The  paint  is  left  with  a glossy  white  surface 
and  adheres  to  the  stone  so  firmly  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  remove  it  by  fair  means. 
This  technique  is  still  carried  on  in  Persia,  on  the  borders  of  China  and  Tibet,  and 
sporadically  in  Sindh.®®  In  the  last  province  the  juice  of  a plant  is  mixed  with  the  alkali, 
presumably  to  keep  it  from  flaking  off  the  stone  before  it  has  been  made  fast  by  heat. 

It  is  uncertain  what  medium  was  used  to  produce  the  black  coloured  patterns  on  the 
Type  II  beads.  The  while  background  was  formed  by  flooding  the  red  carnelian  with  the 
alkali,  thus  creating  a white,  opaque  surface.  Mr.  Beck,  in  a personal  communication  states: 
“I  have  succeeded  in  making  the  black  lines  on  whitened  carnelians  and  agates.  I have 
used  copper,  cobalt,  and  manganese,  but  have  failed  with  lead  and  only  got  a very  pale 
effect  with  iron.  The  cobalt  is  the  easiest,  but  I think  that  the  copper  gives  the  closest 
resemblance.  Manganese,  unless  very  thickly  done,  has  a rather  purple  appearance.” 

It  is  therefore  possible  that  a copper  solution  was  the  paint  used,  but  as  the  black 

Frankfort  in  lllust.  Lon.  Neivs,  Nov.  i,  1932,  p.  504,  fig.  7:  and  in  “The  Indus  Civilization 
and  the  Near  East,”  Ann.  Bih.  Ind.  Arch.,  1932,  pi.  I (d,  m). 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  pi.  1 33. 

Thompson,  Archaeologia,  Vol.  LXXIX,  p.  143.  These,  however,  may  be  late. 

E.  F.  Schmidt,  “Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  p.  438,  pi.  CXLIV. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  505,  pi.  CXI,  4. 

Mackay,  “ Decorated  Carnelian  Beads,”  Man,  Vol.  XXXIII,  sect.  1 50. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


201 


pattern  on  Bead  No.  12  has  a decided  purplish  tinge,  a manganese  paint  may  well  have 
been  employed  in  this  particular  case. 

The  greatest  skill  must  have  been  required  in  the  working  of  tw'O  out  of  these  three 
types  of  beads.  To  apply  fine,  even  lines,  such  as  appear  on  the  specimens  in  PI.  LXXIX, 
13,  14,  16,  on  a hard,  polished  surface  needed  a sure  hand  and  a well  made  brush  or  pen. 
The  most  difficult  process  of  all,  however,  was  the  firing;  personal  experiment  has  proved 
how  difficult  this  was;  too  much  heat  destroys  the  colour  as  well  as  the  translucency  of  the 
stone,  too  little  fails  to  fuse  the  alkali  sufficiently. 

Beads  of  Type  II  were  by  far  the  easier  to  decorate.  There  was  no  red  colour  to  be 
anxious  about  and  the  white  surface  was  comparatively  easy  to  obtain.  Even  beads  that 
had  failed  to  survive  the  other  two  processes  could  have  been  altered  to  that  used  for  Tjqje  II. 

Lew  of  the  beads  shown  are  in  perfect  condition.  Some  of  them,  for  instance,  Nos. 
2,  5-7,  12,  15,  have  been  broken  in  boring,  a process  which  seems  invariably  to  have  been 
carried  out  after  the  beads  were  painted  and  fired. 

The  most  popular  pattern  was  the  figure-of-eight  appearing  on  Nos.  4-7.  Eour  other 
beads,  that  are  not  illustrated  here,  bear  the  same  motif;  another  example  was  found 
by  Mr.  Majumdar  in  his  early  work  at  Chanhu-daro;  it  also  occurs  on  beads  from  Tell 
Asmar,  Kish,  and  Ur.  It  is  present,  in  combination  with  the  trefoil  motif,  on  the  robe  worn 
by  the  steatite  figure  of  a priest  or  deity  found  some  years  ago  at  Mohenjo-daro.*^  The  two 
joined  circles  composing  it  are  generally  empty,  but  occasionally  their  interiors  are  filled 
with  small  circles  as  in  Nos.  9-1 1.  No.  14  is  a variation  of  the  same  pattern  carried  out  in 
very  fine  lines.  This  figure-of-eight  device  is  still  in  use  in  parts  of  India  at  the  present 
day.  It  is  said  to  be  a protection  against  the  Evil  Eye  and  on  this  account  is  sometimes 
employed  as  a brand  for  cattle. It  occasionally  appears  on  the  early  punch-marked  coins. “ 

No.  8 in  Pi.  LXXIX  has  a guilloche  pattern  that  is  not  found  on  carnelian  beads 
outside  India,  although  it  often  appears  on  Sumerian  seals  dating  from  Early  Dynastic  times 
and  onwards.'*'  The  markings  on  beads  Nos.  12,  13,  15  are  identical  with  some  on  beads 
from  the  Royal  Tombs  at  Ur.'*' 

The  chevron  motif  on  No.  16  is  again  known  on  heads  from  Tell  Asmar  and  Ur.^® 
This  particular  bead  is  of  a most  unusual  dark  red  colour,  but  this  in  no  way  impairs  the 
beauty  and  translucency  of  the  stone.  The  white  lines  forming  the  pattern  are  extremely 
fine  and  regular. 

^°No.  940,  Trench  D(i),  loc.  41,  lev.  —4.4ft.;  No.  1120,  Trench  I(i),  loc.  73,  lev.  —3.2ft.; 
No.  2669,  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev.  -f  9.5  ft.;  No.  4221,  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  474,  lev.  -f  io.8  ft. 

Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XVII,  25. 

«M.I.C.,  pi.  XCVIII,  1,2. 

“ Evnl  Eye  Brands,”  lllust.  Weekly,  Times  of  India,  26/4  '31. 

J.  Allen,  “ Ancient  Indian  Coins,”  Cat.  Brit.  Mus.,  1936.  Index,  IV,  p.  7. 

For  the  use  of  this  motif  as  a pictographic  character  on  the  Mohenjo-daro  seals,  see  Smith  and 
Gadd  in  AI.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXIV  (cLxxxii). 

'Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  pis.  133,  220. 

Frankfort,  Ann.  Bih.  hid.  Arch.,  1932,  pi.  ICd). 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  pi.  133. 


202 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


The  pattern  painted  on  beads  Nos.  12,  13,  also  popular  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  on 
similar  beads  from  the  Royal  Cemetery  at  Ur,  is  curiously  enough  not  found  on  any  other 
kind  of  objects.  The  motif  on  No.  1 5 is  undoubtedly  derived  from  the  well-known  divided 
circle  design  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  appears  on  many  objects  of  the  Harappa 
Culture  and  was  also  popular  in  Sumer  and  far-away  Crete. 

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  these  carnelian  beads  have  been  shaped  to  lie  as  flat 
as  possible.  The  motif  is  always  repeated  on  the  reverse  side  of  each  bead. 

Spacers  (Pi.  LXXX,  10-20) 

The  types  shown  in  the  above  plate  are  well  known  in  other  centres  of  the  Harappa 
Culture  and  therefore  do  not  merit  further  description  here.  The  materials  of  which  they 
are  made  and  other  information  concerning  them  will  he  found  in  the  catalogue  at  the 
end  of  this  report. 

Terminals  (Pis.  LXXX,  21-25,  LXXXV,  32) 

No.  22  in  Pi.  LXXX  measures  0.79  inch  wide  and  is  made  in  faience  which  has  a 
greenish  glaze.  The  separate  ends  of  the  strings  of  beads  were  first  attached  to  a short  bar 
of  some  kind,  which  was  then  inserted  in  the  slot  carved  in  the  straight  or  inner  side  of  this 
terminal;  after  this  they  were  gathered  together  and  passed  through  the  hole  to  the  opposite 
side  where  they  were  twisted  into  a cord  by  which  the  necklace  could  he  tied. 

No.  23  is  roughly  made  of  potter)'  and  has  no  slip  or  ornamentation.  Like  the  previous 
example  it  has  a slot  to  receive  a tying-har,  which  was  probably  fastened  in  with  cement. 
The  large  size  of  this  terminal  (2.6  inches  wide)  suggests  that  it  once  formed  part  of  a 
girdle  composed  of  long,  barrel-cylinder  pottery  beads  similar  to  those  shown  in  PI.  LXXXI, 
25-30.  Such  a girdle  must  have  been  a fairly  close  copy  of  the  magnificent  carnelian  and 
bronze  specimen  discovered  some  years  ago  at  Mohenjo-daro,'^  where  terminals  verv  similar 
to  this  one  but  made  in  faience  and  of  better  workmanship,  have  also  came  to  light.” 

No.  24  is  in  faience,  bearing  traces  of  a green  glaze.  In  this  case  each  of  the  four 
strings  of  the  necklace  was  passed  through  a separate  hole.  A fifth  hole  at  the  apex  of 
the  terminal  took  the  cord  by  which  the  necklace  was  tied.  This  again  is  a variety  known 
at  Mohenjo-daro.” 

No.  32  in  Pi.  LXXXV  is  roughly  made  in  Amazon  stone,  a material  which  appears 
to  have  been  liked  but  rarely  used  by  the  Harappa  people. 

Pendants  (Pis.  LXXX,  26-34,  LXXXV,  27,  29,  LXXXIX,  6,18) 

The  pendants  shown  in  Pi.  LXXX  are  black  or  dark  brown  in  colour  and,  with  the 
exception  of  the  first,  are  carved  from  a variety  of  hornblende.  No.  26  is  of  dark  grey  steatite, 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXLVI,  43;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CXXV,  5;  CXXXV,  3, 19(g). 

This  slot  measures  o.  1 2 inch  in  width  and  depth. 

M.l.  C.,  pl.CLI,  b(io). 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  520,  521;  pis.  CXXXIV,  24,  CXXXVI,  47,  etc. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXLVII,  27. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


203 


a most  unusual  material  for  an  ornament  of  this  kind.  This  type  of  pendant  has  been  found 
in  considerable  numbers  at  Mohenjo-daro,  in  some  cases  in  collections  of  jewellery.  They 
would  seem  to  have  been  attached  to  necklaces  by  means  of  threads  or  wires  tied  round  the 
grooves  which  are  always  found  in  their  upper  portions.  Nos.  32  and  34  are  forms  which,  at 
present,  are  unknown  elsewhere.  The  first  is  perforated  with  a hole  and  may  originally  have 
been  one  of  several  ornaments  threaded  side  by  side  on  a cord. 

The  pottery  object,  No.  27  in  Pi.  LXXXV,  is  probably  an  amulet  of  some  kind.  It  is 
composed  of  three  separate  strips  of  clay  and  has  a plain,  flat  back.  No.  29  is  in  shell;  its 
lower  part  is  missing. 

No.  6 in  PI.  LXXXIX  is  made  of  steatite,  dark  grey  in  colour  and  1.14  inches  long.  It 
is  rectangular  in  section,  measuring  0.5  by  0.3  inches  at  the  base  and  tapering  to  0.39  by 
0.25  inches  at  the  top.  A roughly  cut  groove  encircles  its  upper  portion.  No.  18  in  the 
same  plate  is  a pendant  of  shell,  2.45  inches  long  bored  with  a hole  o.i  i inch  in  diameter. 

Plate  LXXXl.  The  parallel-sided  beads  seen  in  this  plate  (Nos.  1-24)  are  round, 
square,  or  elliptical  in  section  and  made  of  various  materials  such  as  vitreous  paste,  pottery, 
steatite,  copper  or  bronze,  Amazon  stone,  and  lapis-lazuli.  The  last  named  examples  (Nos. 
5,  14,  20,  23)  may  be  importations  from  Sumer,  where  this  stone  was  much  more  abun- 
dantly used  than  in  India.  On  the  other  hand  two  unfinished  beads  of  it  found  at 
Chanhu-daro  show  that  it  was  occasionally  worked  there. 

No.  2 is  cylindrical  in  form  and  made  of  coiled  copper  wire.  Several  of  these  wire 
beads  were  found  in  the  “Great  Cutting”  at  the  depth  of  —20.5  feet.“  No.  33  in  Pi. 
LXXXV  is  a wire  bead  of  a simpler  kind,  and  Nos.  30  and  3 1 in  the  same  plate  may  also 
have  been  beads.  Only  one  bead  like  No.  2 has  turned  up  at  Mohenjo-daro;  like  it  it  is 
cylindrical  in  form.” 

Nos.  17-19,  21  in  Pi.  LXXXl  are  made  of  either  copper  or  bronze.  The  first  two  and 
last  were  found  adhering  together  and  must  have  belonged  to  the  same  necklace.  Group 
No.  1 7 is  composed  of  a brown  and  white  barrel-shaped  jasper  bead  with  a cylindrical  metal 
one  on  each  side.  No.  18  has  lost  one  of  its  companion  beads.  The  central  bead  of  No.  21 
is  oval  in  section  and  made  of  variegated  jaspar;  the  bronze  ones  flanking  it  are  of  similar 
shape.  No.  19  is  a plain  bronze  tubular  bead  which  must  have  been  worn  on  a very  thick 
cord.  Its  present  oval  shape  in  section  is  perhaps  due  to  earth  pressure.  A copper  wire  fills 
the  interior  of  No.  22,  which  is  of  faience  coated  with  a glaze  that  has  now  faded  to  a 
cream  colour. 

Cylindrical  beads  even  smaller  than  those  shown  in  PI.  LXXXl,  i were  made  at 
Chanhu-daro.  A mass  of  these  appear  in  PI.  XCIII,  5 and  will  be  mentioned  again  later 
on  in  this  chapter. 

The  long,  barrel-cylinder  pottery  beads.  Nos.  25-30,  in  Pi.  LXXXl  were  popular  among 
the  poorer  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  They  are  copies  of  carnelian  beads  and  nearly  all 
of  them  have,  or  had,  burnished  red  slips  to  imitate  the  colour  of  the  natural  stone.  One 

No.  5351-  From  Sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481. 

” F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXXXVII,  96. 


204 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


specimen,  not  illustrated,  is  made  of  grey  coloured  pottery/®  These  barrel-cylinder  beads, 
which  are  often  roughly  made,  were  moulded  with  the  fingers  round  a straw  or  stalk  which 
burned  away  when  the  beads  were  fired,  leaving  behind  a smooth  and  straight  aperture. 
Many  stone  beads  were  made  in  this  shape;  some  appear  under  numbers  31-36  in  this  plate 
and  others  in  various  stages  of  finish  are  illustrated  in  PL  XCIII,  14. 

Plate  LXXXll.  The  long  barrel-shaped  beads  shown  in  this  plate  are  either  round  or 
elliptical  in  section  and  mostly  made  of  faience  or  a vitreous  paste,  the  latter  being  blue 
in  colour.  Many  of  the  faience  specimens  have  retained  in  a measure  their  original  blue  or 
green  colour;  in  others  this  has  entirely  faded  away  although  their  glazes  are  still  perfect. 
No.  1 3 in  this  material  is  particularly  interesting  on  account  of  the  longitudinal  ridges  on 
either  side  that  show  it  was  made  in  a closed  mould.  The  hole  inside  this  bead  has  cor- 
responding ridges.  No.  5 is  of  banded  jasper,  dark  brown  in  the  centre  with  a dark  red 
band  on  either  side  and  dark  green  ends.  Jaspers  of  various  kinds  and  tints,  agate,  breccia, 
steatite,  and  even  dull  coloured  limestone  were  all  used  in  the  manufacture  of  this  tj’pe 
of  bead. 

Nos.  14-22  are  peculiar  to  Chanhu-daro  and  have  appeared  at  levels  ranging  from 
— 7.8  to  -f-  1 1.3  feet.  All  are  made  in  faience  with  a white  or  cream-coloured  surface,  but 
patches  of  yellow  pigment  upon  some  of  them  are  the  remains  of  a decomposed  glaze.  A 
characteristic  feature  is  the  purple  or  brownish-black  central  band,  which  has  been  applied 
thickly  and  often  very  carelessly,  the  colouring  being  due  to  manganese.  This  make  of 
bead  may  have  suited  a local  demand;  they  are  not  found  elsewhere  and  are  unknown  at 
Mohenjo-daro. 

The  stone  of  which  No.  32  is  made  is  a fossil,  the  scaly  carapace  and  sternum  of  some 
creature  being  clearly  distinguishable.  The  interest  taken  at  Chanhu-daro  in  fossils  is 
indicated  by  the  three  illustrated  in  Pi.  XCIII,  21-23,  while  some  of  the  patterns  incised 
on  dishes  of  food-stands  (PI.  XXXVIII,  14, 16,  17,  19,  21)  are,  as  already  pointed  out, 
derived  from  fossil  ammonite  shells.  No.  38,  of  grey  limestone,  is  unfinished;  it  was 
evidently  waiting  to  have  its  angles  rounded  off. 

Plate  LXXXIII.  The  short-barrelled,  globular,  and  disc-shaped  beads  in  this  plate 
(Nos.  1-42)  are  types  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro.  The  materials  of  which  they  are  made 
include  pottery,  faience,  carnelian,  onyx,  quartz,  hornblende,  and  shell. 

The  majority  of  the  small  disc-beads  (Nos.  27-34),  each  with  a well-defined  median 
ridge,  are  in  pottery  or  faience.  The  pottery  examples  (Nos.  30-33)  are  very  carefully  made 
and  coated  with  a burnished  red  slip.  Here  again  the  intention  was  obviously  to  imitate 
carnelian,  though  surprisingly  few  beads  of  this  exact  type  have  been  found  made  of  that 
stone.  Unfinished  specimens  in  various  stages  of  completion  (PI.  LXXXVI,  a,  1-3)  and  also 
an  allied  type  without  a ridge  are,  however,  quite  common. 

Spherical  beads  in  stone  are  very  uncommon  and  no  examples  are  known  at  Mohenjo- 
daro.  In  any  case  beads  of  this  shape,  even  those  in  faience,  were  not  much  worn  by  the 

“‘’No.  1881,  2.12 inches  long,  from  Trench  GCi),  lev.  —8.7ft. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


205 


Harappa  people.  No.  42,  which  is  of  pottery,  is  quite  a new  type  and  is  hand-made 
without  a slip. 

The  wafer  beads,  Nos.  35-41,  43,  44,  are  almost  invariably  made  of  glazed  steatite  or 
a steatite  paste."  The  type  was  an  extremely  popular  one  and  large  numbers  are  found  on 
most  Indus  Valley  sites.  They  vary  considerably  in  size  and  thickness,  are  often  of  a black 
or  light  yellow  colour,  and  occur  more  frequently  in  the  lower  than  in  the  upper  levels  of  a 
city.  It  is  still  uncertain  how  they  were  made;  possibly  the  larger  ones  were  punched  out  of 
thin  sheets  of  stone  or  paste,  the  hole  being  formed  at  the  same  time.  Quantities  of  very 
minute  wafer  beads  in  an  unfinished  condition  were  recovered  from  a bead-maker’s  shop;  an 
enlarged  view  of  one  is  shown  in  Pi.  LXXXVI.a,  6.  All  of  them  had  been  bored,  though 
obviously  not  completed. 

Nos.  45-48  are  a favourite  variety  of  wafer  bead,  which  was  always  made  in  faience, 
and  bear  a grooved  pattern  on  both  faces. 

The  carved  steatite  beads.  Nos.  49-51,  were  also  popular  at  Mohenjo-daro.“®  These 
take  several  forms  and  in  most  cases  the  pattern  upon  them  is  the  trefoil,  a motif  that  had 
a special  significance  for  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture.  The  cloisonnes  formed  by  the 
trefoils  were  once  filled  in  flush  with  the  surface  with  a red  paste  or  inlay. 

Nos.  52  and  53  are  segmented  beads  in  faience,  and  numbers  of  these  in  various 
lengths  have  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro.  Beads  of  this  type  and  material  are  well  known 
in  Sumer;  at  Ur  copies  of  them  have  been  found  in  gold."*  In  Assyria  they  appeared  in 
the  “ G ” stratum  at  Ashur.*°  Examples  in  stone  have  been  unearthed  in  Badarian  settle- 
ments in  Egypt,"  and  the  type,  in  faience,  was  in  use  again  in  that  country  at  the  close  of 
the  Middle  Kingdom.  At  Tepe  Hissar  in  Western  Persia  a number  of  segmented  beads  in 
faience  were  found  in  a grave  dated  to  Period  III  of  that  site,°"  while  in  Crete  they  were 
common,  both  in  steatite  and  faience,  the  former  belonging  to  the  XI.  XT  I Period  and  the 
latter  to  the  XT  XT  III  Period.®^  Einally  faience  examples  have  been  recovered  from  Early 
Bronze  Age  burials  in  England,"  which  have  now  been  proved  to  be  importations 
from  Egypt. 

As  these  segmented  beads  have  appeared  over  such  a wide  area,  it  is  quite  impossible 
to  say  where  the  type  originated.  Indeed  such  a simple  form  of  bead  need  not  have  had  a 
particular  country  of  origin  at  all.  At  Chanhu-daro  as  well  as  at  Mohenjo-daro  such  beads 
were  produced  by  a kind  of  mass  production.  They  were  made  in  long  rods  which  after 
glazing  were  to  be  divided  into  segments  of  uniform  length.®*  The  rods  found  at  Chanhu- 
daro  were  too  long  and  too  delicate  to  have  been  used  for  any  other  purpose  than  to  be 
broken  into  convenient  lengths. 

Four  examples  of  this  1)4)6  of  bead  have  been  found  made  of  mother-of-pearl. 

M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXLVI,  49,  55;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CXXXVI,  57,  66,  CXXXVII,  97,  98. 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery. 

A.  W.  Andrae,  Die  Archaischen  Ishtar-Tempel  in  Assiir,  p.  82,  fig.  61  (c). 

Brunton  and  Caton-Thompson,  Badarian  Civilization,  pi.  XLIX. 

Schmidt,  “ Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  pi.  CXLV  (H.  490,  a). 

Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  Vol.  II,  p.  179. 

Antiquity,  Vol.  I,  p.  427. 

” F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXXXVI,  6. 


2o6 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Nos.  54-56  are  rouglily  made  pottery  beads  coated  with  a red  slip.  This  is  a very  rare 
type;  two  are  reported  from  Mohenjo-daro  and  only  three  have  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Of  yellow  agate,  veined  with  white,  No.  57  is  an  unfinished  bead  measuring  1.61 
inches  long  and  but  0.35  inch  thick.  It  is  unbored,  and  grinding  has  failed  to  remove  many 
of  the  facets  of  its  preliminary  flaking.  Beads  of  this  particular  shape  and  size  are  well 
known  objects  in  Mesopotamia  and  in  Persia.®^ 

Plate  LXXXIV.  Beads  1-3  in  this  plate  are  of  a type  that  was  particularly  favoured 
by  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture;  they  are  usually  made  in  faience  or  the  more 
enduring  vitreous  paste.  No.  4 is  an  elbow-shaped  bead  of  brown  translucent  agate  with  a 
high  polish  and  veined  with  the  same,  hut  deeper,  shade.  It  is  elliptical  in  section  and 
0.15  inch  thick.  At  Mohenjo-daro  the  nearest  approach  in  shape  to  this  bead  is  one  com- 
posed of  steatite  paste  and  coloured  to  imitate  decorated  carnelian.®®  Other  examples  made 
in  hard  stones  are  known  at  Ur,®®  Merkes,™  and  Egypt.^^  None  of  these,  however,  has 
anything  like  the  right-angled  bend  of  our  Chanhu-daro  specimen. 

No.  5,  which  is  also  of  agate,  is  a most  unusual  shape  for  a bead  in  this  hard  material. 

The  tapered  beads.  Nos.  6 and  7,  are  in  shell  and  probably  alternated  with  beads  of  a 
similar  shape  but  in  a darker,  contrasting  colour.  Their  very  large  apertures  show  that 
they  had  been  strung  on  a very  thick  cord.  No.  8,  which  is  also  tapered,  is  made  of  a dark 
grey  stone. 

A grooved  bead  resembling  Nos.  i o and  1 1 was  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro,^^  but  was 
round  in  section  and  canned  in  steatite,  whereas  the  two  we  show  are  of  pottery.  This  type  of 
bead,  it  would  appear,  is  peculiar  to  the  Harappa  civilization. 

No.  12  is  a carnelian  bead  with  a natural  white  line  round  its  margin.  No.  13  is  of 
yellow  agate  veined  with  red  and  although  well  shaped  had  been  discarded  unfinished 
owing  to  a serious  flaw  on  one  side. 

Of  the  collection  of  pottery'  beads  (Nos.  14-30}  all  hut  No.  20  are  decorated  in  various 
ways  with  incised  markings;  the  exception  bears  dark  red  patches  applied  on  the  natural 
surface  of  the  pottery.  Made  of  the  same  clay  as  that  used  for  the  pottery,  they  vary 
considerably  in  finish.  Some  of  the  better  made  have  had  their  ends  rubbed  down  so  that 
they  might  fit  closer  together.'®  Nos.  25,  27,  and  29  show  traces  of  a bright  red  slip,  the 
remainder  possesses  no  slip  at  all.  The  levels  at  which  they  lay  were  widely  divergent; 
No.  30  was  uncovered  as  low  as  —18.2  and  No.  19  as  high  as  + 15.6  feet.  Beads  of 

**  Mackay,  Anthropology  Memoirs,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  Vol.  I,  pi.  LX,  i,  2. 

Schmidt,  “Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  pis.  CXLIV,  CXLVI. 

0®  F.  E.  M.,  p.  517;  pis.  CXI,  8,  CXXXIX,  99. 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  p.  372,  fig.  79. 

Koldeu'ey,  Excavations  at  Babylon,  p.  263,  fig.  185. 

Edwards  Collection,  University  College,  London.  This  is  made  in  onyx  and  dated  to  the 
Twelfth  Dynasty. 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CXXXIV,  I. 

” This  treatment  of  the  ends  was  a definite  refinement  and  not  caused  by  one  bead  rubbing 
against  another. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


207 


exactly  the  same  type  have  appeared  on  many  sites  in  Sindh/^  including  Mohenjo-daro 
where  they  were  very  common.’' 

Plate  LXXXV.  Nos.  i-io,  19,  21,  28  in  this  plate  are  faience  beads  of  a type  that  up 
to  the  present  have  been  found  on  only  two  sites  in  India,  namely  Chanhu-daro  and 
Lohumjo-daro,  which  are  some  sixty  miles  apart.’'  Eor  this  reason  they  were  first  assigned  to 
the  Jhukar  Period,  but  eventually  too  many  of  them  came  to  light  at  levels  ranging  from 
+ 3.0  to  + 13.2  feet  for  this  to  be  likely.  One  bead  (No.  5)  was  found  on  the  summit 
of  Mound  I. 

These  very  ornamental  beads  are  made  of  a light  grey  paste,  gritty  to  the  feel,  except 
two  (Nos.  19,  21)  which  are  composed  of  a yellow  substance  not  unlike  in  appearance  and 
feel  that  used  for  certain  amulets  from  Mohenjo-daro.”  Many  of  the  examples  shown 
have  lost  their  colour  but  not  their  glaze.  Nos.  5,  7,  10,  28  show  a slight  tinge  of  green. 
The  glaze  covering  No.  20  is  of  a definite  purple  colour,  manganese  having  been  used 
instead  of  copper  as  the  colouring  agent.  The  bobbin-shaped  bead  No.  28  is  different  from 
the  others  but  it,  too,  has  been  made  in  a mould;  its  glaze,  which  is  well  preserved  in  places, 
is  apple-green  in  colour.  The  patterns  on  these  beads  vary  somewhat;  all  were  carv^ed  with 
a sharp  instrument  previous  to  glazing. 

Nos.  11-18,  24-26  are  undoubtedly  allied  to  the  beads  described  above.  They  are 
made  in  exactly  the  same  way  and  like  them  are  beaded  at  both  ends.  Three  are  incised 
with  markings  also  of  very  much  the  same  nature  as  on  the  beads  above.  The  cores  of 
Nos.  15,  17,  26  are  light  yellow  in  colour,  and  No.  17  shows  evidence  of  a red-coloured 
glaze.’'  Beads  of  this  sub-type  are  foreign  also  to  Mohenjo-daro. 

No.  22,  which  is  made  of  lapis-lazuli,  has  already  been  included  among  the  terminals. 
No.  23  is  made  of  the  same  stone,  which  in  this  case  is  of  poor  quality.  This  last  bead  is 
rectangular  in  section  and  0.47  inch  thick;  for  some  reason  a part  of  its  lower  end  has 
been  cut  away. 

The  shell  ornament  No.  34  has  been  accidentally  burned  and  is  now  much  warped. 
It  averages  0.75  inch  high  and  is  possibly  a fitting  of  some  kind  rather  than  a bead. 

Plate  LXXXVl,  h.  Nos.  1-6  in  this  plate  are  small  shells,  four  of  them  being  cowries. 
The  spires  of  Nos.  i and  6 have  been  removed  to  convert  them  into  beads;  the  cowry  No.  2 
has  been  bored  for  the  same  reason.  The  remaining  shells  have  no  holes  at  all  or  other 
means  of  attachment  and  may,  therefore,  have  been  preserved  as  curios  by  their  former 
owners.  No.  3 is  the  largest  of  the  six  and  measures  1.9  inches  in  length. 

Shells  actually  used  as  beads,  as  distinct  from  beads  made  of  shell,  were  not  very 
popular  with  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture;  cowries  are  particulary  rare,  Mohenjo- 

Majumdar,  Exflorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXXIII,  35,  36,  70,  71,  82. 

F.  E.  M.,  pp.  514,  515;  pis.  CXXXVI,  1 1,  CXXXIX,  48, 49. 

Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  p.  52,  pi.  XXXIII,  10. 

” F.  E.  M.,  p.  350;  pis.  XCI,  I,  XCII,  2,  3,  10,  CII,  3, 9. 

Red  glazes  are  also  known  at  Mohenjo-daro.  M.  I.  C.,  p.  686;  F.  E.  M.,  p.  417. 


2o8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


daro  having  produced  only  one  specimen/^  The  remaining  objects  in  this  plate  will  be 
explained  later. 

Plate  LXXXVII  (Jhukar  Beads).  No.  i is  a section  of  the  Jhukar  bead-seal  illustrated 
in  Pi.  L,  4, 4a  and  described  in  Chapter  IX. 

The  long-barrel  faience  beads  Nos.  2-7  are  round  in  section,  rather  carelessly  fashioned, 
and  bear  roughly  incised  markings.  Their  cores  consist  of  a gritty  paste,  light  grey  in 
colour  and  thickly  coated  with  a glaze  that  is  now  light  green.  No.  7a,  although 
undecorated,  certainly  belongs  to  this  series  and  was  found,  with  other  beads  of  tbe  same 
type,  with  the  head-cone  shown  in  Pi.  XXIX,  68.  These  beads  are  undoubtedly  of  Jhukar 
workmanship.  Most  of  them  were  found  at  levels  ranging  from  16.7  to  as  much  as  22.7 
feet  above  datum  level.  Though  the  form  is  common,  the  very  distinct  and  unusual 
markings  show  them  to  be  foreign  to  anything  made  by  the  people  of  the  earlier  culture. 

The  strange-looking  beads  Nos.  8-10  are  also  made  in  faience.  Two  of  these  were 
found  at  high  levels  and  a third  (No.  9)  was  taken  from  the  foot  of  A'lound  II.  All  three 
are  round  in  section  and  shaped  entirely  by  hand;  only  one  has  retained  its  original  green 
colour. 

The  bi-cones.  Nos.  11-19,  21,  are  all  round  in  section  and  made  of  pottery.  Beads  of 
this  type  were  found  in  large  numbers  at  Chanbu-daro  at  the  average  level  of  -f  16.6  feet, 
and  many  also  were  uncovered  on  the  outskirts  of  Mound  II  where  they  had  been 
carried  by  erosion.  The  great  majority  are  made  of  a grey  clay;  a few  are  pink  or  drab  in 
colour.  No.  19  being  of  the  last.  The  surfaces  of  some  of  these  beads  show  a certain 
amount  of  faceting  due  to  careful  paring  after  they  had  been  first  moulded  into  shape  by 
hand,  which  treatment  also  accentuated  their  pronounced  median  ridges.  Some  of  these 
beads  show  distinct  traces  of  polish,  others  such  as  Nos.  1 1 and  14,  are  coated  with  a black 
slip.  No  beads  of  this  particular  make  were  worn  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

Nos.  20,  23  and  24  are  faience  seal-amulets  of  Jhukar  workmanship  and  described 
in  Chapter  IX. 

Jhangar  Bead 

The  large  bead  No.  22  in  Pi.  LXXXVII  (see  also  Pi.  LXXXVI,  b,  7)  is  made  of  a dark 
grey  clay  that  contains  much  carbonized  matter.  It  is  roughly  made  and  the  incised 
triangular  pattern  it  bears  correlates  it  with  the  incised  pottery  of  the  Jhangar  Period 
illustrated  in  PI.  XXXIX,  1-8.  A bead,  not  unlike  this  one,  but  described  as  unburnt,  was 
unearthed  at  the  site  of  Jhangar  itself.®” 

Materials  Used  in  Bead-making 

Agate  and  carnelian  were  the  materials  most  generally  used  in  the  manufacture  of 
beads  during  the  Harappa  Period,  carnelian  being  decidedly  the  rarer.  Next  follow  faience 
and  vitreous  paste,  while  steatite,  or  a substance  formed  from  it,  comes  a bad  fifth.  Pottery 
was  also  quite  common  and  is  next  on  the  list.  Beads  made  of  other  materials  were  dis- 


™ F.  E.  M.,  p.  582. 


Majumdar,  Explorations  in  Sind,  pi.  XXXIII,  64. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


209 


covered  in  the  following  quantities:  copper  or  bronze  (16  beads);  shell  (16  beads);  lapis- 
lazuli  (15  beads);  jasper  (14  beads);  a variety  of  hornblende  (13  pendants  and  beads); 
crystal  (10  beads  and  lumps);  quartz  (8  beads);  Amazon  stone  (8  beads);  chalcedony 
C7  beads);  limestone  (5  beads);  onyx  (4  beads);  fuchsite-quartzite  (2  beads);  haematite 
(i  bead);  breccia  (i  bead);  plasma  (i  bead).  No  amethyst  beads  w'ere  found,  but  two 
masses  of  this  stone  came  to  light,  one  of  these  being  illustrated  in  PI.  XCIII,  2.®^ 

Two  unfinished  beads  of  lapis-lazuli  prove  that  this  stone  was  actually  worked  at 
Chanhu-daro;  the  finished  specimens  are  not,  therefore,  likely  to  be  importations.  The 
source  of  this  mineral  is  thought  to  he  Badakshan,®^  while  new  provenances  for  Amazonite 
(eight  beads  of  which  have  been  found,  as  against  only  three  at  Mohenjo-daro)  is,  according 
to  Mr.  D.  H.  Gordon,  to  be  found  in  the  pegmatites  near  Jhajha  (Monghyr  District, 
Bihar),  the  Nellore  District  of  Madras,®®  and  near  the  village  of  Derol,  just  north  of 
Ahmadabad.®"* 

The  two  beads  of  fuchsite-quartzite  are  particularly  interesting,  for,  although  this  rare 
mineral  was  never  used  for  beads  at  Mohenjo-daro,  a large  cup  carved  in  almost  pure 
fuchsite  was  found  there,  together  with  a collection  of  copper  and  bronze  tools  and  other 
objects.®'  The  colour  of  this  stone  is  light  green  and  its  source,  according  to  the  Geological 
Survey  of  India,  is  most  probably  Mysore.®® 

Pour  wafer-shaped  mother-of-pearl  beads  were  unearthed  together  in  Square  9/G, 
locus  206  at  the  level  +9.7  feet.  Beads  of  this  particular  substance  are  very  rare,  Mohenjo- 
daro  having  produced  only  one  example.®^  Jade  seems  never  to  have  been  worked  at 
Chanhu-daro  at  all,  and  this  statement  also  applies  to  various  other  stones  that  were  used 
for  beads  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

A large  number  of  nodules  of  carnelian  and  agate  were  discovered  in  Squares  7/C,  7/F, 
9/C,  and  9/D  (see  Pis.  IV,  XCIII,  17-20),  the  former  being  as  a rule  easily  distinguishable 
from  the  latter  by  the  darkness  of  its  skin.  Some  of  these  nodules  have  been  slightly  chipped, 
as  if  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  see  the  colour  within,  and  a considerable  quantity  was 
found  in  a bead-maker’s  workshop  in  Square  9/D,  room  215  at  the  level  + 10.4  feet.  It  is, 
of  course,  impossible  to  say  whether  these  nodules  had  been  burnt  to  improve  their  colour 
before  or  after  their  arrival  at  Chanhu-daro.®® 

Small  blocks  of  steatite  in  light  yellow,  dark  grey,  and  black  were  not  uncommon  in 
various  parts  of  Mound  II.  Many  of  them  bear  the  marks  of  the  saw  which  had  cut  them 
up  into  shapes  suitable  for  both  beads  and  seals.  Pieces  that  could  not  be  used  for  any 
other  purpose  were  ground  into  powder  and  then  compressed  into  blocks,  from  which 

The  second  lump  (No.  3417)  was  found  in  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  306,  lev.  -f-  6.6  ft. 
s-  M.  1.  C.,  pp.  542,  543. 

Man,  1925,  sect.  49. 

“ Iraq,  vol.  VII,  1940,  p.  9.  This  last  source  is  roughly  350  miles  distant  from  Chanhu-daro. 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CXVI,  2,  CXVIII,  9. 

^^Op.cit.,  pp.  320,  321.  I have  to  thank  Dr.  A.  M.  Heron  for  the  identification  of  the  two 
Chanhu-daro  beads. 

Op.  cit.,  p.  497,  pi.  CXXXVII,  43. 

Possible  sources  for  the  raw  material  are  given  by  Sir  Edwin  Pascoe  in  M.  I.  C.,  p.  681.  See 
also  A.  J.  Arkell,  “ Cambay  and  the  Bead  Trade,”  Antiquity,  Vol.  X,  pp.  292-305. 


210 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


beads  and  even  occasionally  seals  were  made.  This  made-up  steatite  is  always  white  in 
colour  and  was  probably  calcined  before  compression.  It  is  often  ver\'  difficult  to  detect, 
especially  as  objects  composed  of  it  are  more  often  than  not  coated  with  a glaze.  The 
composition  is  apt  to  crumble  after  long  sojourn  in  a salty  soil,  whereas  the  natural  stone 
remains  unaffected. 

]\Ir.  Horace  Beck,  however,  is  not  disposed  to  agree  that  reformed  steatite  was  used  by 
the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture.*^^’  Dr.  F.  A.  Bannister,  of  the  Mineral  Department  of 
the  British  Museum,  informs  me  that  steatite  paste  would  become  indistinguishable  from 
the  natural  material  after  being  subjected  to  a very  high  temperature.  Steatite  beads  were 
sometimes  heated  to  a temperature  exceeding  1200°  C.  in  ancient  India  and  it  has  been 
proved  that  the  heap  of  minute  beads  in  PI.  XCIII,  5,  which  will  be  described  later,  was 
treated  to  this  degree  of  heat.®®  These  beads  must  have  been  composed  of  a paste  which 
could  be  forced  through  fine  tubular  instruments  similar  to  those  appearing  in  PI.  LXXX,  1-8. 

As  already  pointed  out,  faience  beads  were  sometimes,  shaped  in  a mould,  the  holes 
being  made  at  the  same  time.  One  unglazed  cylindrical  bead,  which  had  undergone  this 
moulding  process,  has  been  left  unbored,  and  though  the  operation  could  easily  have  been 
done  afterwards  in  such  soft  material,  it  would  have  been  simpler  to  do  the  two  together.®^ 

Traces  of  gold  foil  of  appreciable  thickness  were  found  adhering  to  one  of  the  copper 
beads,  and  it  is,  indeed,  quite  possible  that  many  of  the  beads  and  bangles  in  this  metal 
were  originally  thus  covered.  A bronze  bead  coated  with  thin  gold  is  reported  also  from 
Mohenjo-daro.®^ 

Bead-making 

The  majority  of  the  beads  found  at  Chanhu-daro  were  unfinished,  and  a certain 
amount  of  information  concerning  the  various  technical  processes  used  in  the  making  of 
them  has  already  been  published.®®  It  seems  unnecessary,  therefore,  to  recapitulate  what 
has  already  been  said  on  this  subject. 

Nos.  1-3  in  PI.  LXXXVI,  a,  are  disc-shaped  carnelian  beads  that  are  made  as  shown  in 
No.  2 from  roughly  flaked  stone  blanks  averaging  0.58  inch  in  diameter  and  0.21  inch 
thick.  Each  of  these  beads  has  been  bored  with  a chert  drill  of  the  type  that  appears  in 
PI.  XCIII,  6-8.  All  the  holes  are  splintered  rather  than  cut  and  would  have  to  be  smoothed 
down  and  polished  later.  Before  this  was  done,  however,  the  beads  were  shaped  by 
grinding,  as  No.  i shows.  A number  of  these  were  probably  strung  on  a thread,  or,  more 
likely  still,  a piece  of  copper  wire,  and  then  rolled  to  and  fro  on  grit-stones  of  various  grades, 
each  bead  allowed  sufficient  play  for  its  rounded  edge  to  be  properly  formed.  Those 
illustrated  in  No.  i are  well  on  the  way  to  completion  and  average  0.33  inch  in  diameter. 
They  were  found  associated  with  the  bored  blanks  in  No.  2,  in  a building  which  had  been 
given  over  to  the  craft  of  bead-making  for  several  generations.  Nos.  3a,  3b  are  micro- 

ISotes  on  Glazed  Stones  (Glazed  Steatite),”  Ancient  Bgypt  and  the  East,  1934,  pp.  1-15. 

Mackay,  Bead  Making  in  Ancient  Sind,”  Journ.  Anier.  Orient.  Soc.,  Vol.  47  pp.  ii,  12,. 

No.  2560;  from  Sq.  9/G,  loc.  244,  lev.  ty  9.3  ft. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  501. 

Mackay,  “ Bead  Making  in  Ancient  Sind,”  Journ.  Amer.  Orien.  Soc.,  Vol.  57,  pp.  1-15. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


21  I 


photographs,  enlarged  three  times,  of  one  of  the  unfinished  beads  in  No.  2.  The  first  is  a 
sectional  \’ie\v  and  shows  how  these  beads  were  bored  from  both  sides,  the  borings  meeting 
in  a hole  in  the  middle;  it  depicts  clearly  the  rough  surface  left  by  the  drill  which  had  to  be 
smoothed  down  later. 

No.  9 in  Pi.  LXXXVI,  b is  a slip  or  bar  of  agate,  3.30  inches  in  length  and  roughly 
rectangular  in  section.  It  had  first  been  severed  from  the  parent  nodule  by  sawing  and 
then  by  splitting.  The  saw  used  may  well  have  been  of  the  type  shown  in  PI.  LXIII,  i, 
and  the  kerf  it  left  can  be  clearly  seen  in  the  longitudinal  line  bisecting  the  photograph. 
A saw  made  of  so  soft  a metal  as  copper  or  bronze  would,  howe\"er,  have  been  useless 
without  the  aid  of  an  abrasive  such  as  emery  or  powdered  quartz,  but  given  these,  a copper 
saw  would  be  more  effective  than  one  in  a harder  metal. 

The  group  in  Pl.XCIII,  14,  a-e  illustrates  the  various  stages  through  which  a bead  of 
the  long  barrel-cylinder  type  had  to  pass  before  it  was  completed.  The  shaping  was  carried 
out  entirely  by  careful  flaking  (beads  d and  e),  and  when  this  was  over  the  beads  were 
ground  on  hones  of  v’ar^’ing  grades,  similar  to  those  appearing  in  Nos.  9,  10,  15  on  the 
same  plate.  When  all  depressions  and  irregularities  had  been  smoothed  away  by  grinding 
(partly  performed  in  beads  b and  c),  the  object  was  then  polished  (bead  a).  It  is  not  yet 
known  how  this  last  process  was  carried  out.  A finely  divided  iron  oxide  used  in  conjunction 
with  a leather-covered  board  would  have  been  admirable  for  this  purpose. 

Before  this  final  finish  took  place,  however,  the  bead,  as  already  mentioned,  had  to 
be  bored,  a process  that  was  carried  out  from  both  ends  by  means  of  a drill  similar  to  one  of 
those  in  PI.  LXXXVI,  b,  8.  The  working  end  of  these  drills  (shown  point  downwards  in 
the  photograph)  was  provided  with  a small  depression  to  hold  the  fine  abrasive  and  water 
that  gave  the  drill  the  necessary  bite.  This  depression  can  be  seen  verv  clearly  in  the 
micro-photograph  (X  12  times)  in  PI.  LXXXVI,  a,  5,  while  No.  4 in  the  same  plate,  which 
depicts  the  end  of  a bead  broken  in  drilling  (X  9),  distinctly  shows  the  small  pimple  formed 
by  the  cavity  in  the  drill.  In  the  case  of  hard  stone  beads  such  as  these  it  was  impossible  to 


212 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


In  spite  of  the  care  that  must  have  been  exercised  in  using  such  brittle  instruments, 
the  number  of  breakages  must  have  been  immense.  Broken  drills  were  found  everywhere 
in  Mound  II  and  though  these  might  have  ser\'ed  again  in  the  boring  of  the  shorter  hard- 
stone  beads,  it  is  obvious  that  the  drill-makers,  if,  indeed,  the  bead-makers  did  not  manu- 
facture their  own  tools,  must  have  been  hard  put  to  it  to  supply  the  demand. 

Though  unhnished  beads  of  hard  stones  have  been  found  on  many  Sumerian  sites, 
only  one  stone  drill,  of  the  type  just  described,  has  been  found  in  that  country'.  This  was 
identified  by  Mr.  Beck  among  some  objects  from  Ur,  who  hrst  of  all  classed  it,  on  account 
of  the  cavity  in  its  point,  as  an  unhnished  bead.*"’  Indeed,  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that 
bead-making  in  Sumer  was  carried  on  by  Indian  craftsmen. 

No.  6 in  Pi.  LXXXVI,  a,  is  a micro-photograph  (X  25)  of  one  of  a large  collection  of 
unhnished  wafer-shaped  beads  in  a dark-brown  steatite.  The  specimen  illustrated  actually 
measures  0.15  inch  across  its  widest  part.  Mr.  Beck,  who  has  examined  some  of  these 
beads,  writes  to  me  as  follows:  “This  hnd  is  of  great  interest.  It  consists  of  a great  number 
of  small  flat  plates  of  steatite  which  have  been  perforated,  and  is  evidently  a collection  of 
partly  made  beads.  Marks  made  by  hies  or  abrasive  on  the  flat  surfaces  of  the  plates  show 
that  they  have  been  worked  down  to  the  length  of  the  bead.  These  plates  are  either 
unhnished  beads  in  the  process  of  manufacture,  or  beads  that  have  for  some  reason  been 
discarded  when  only  half  made.  The  thickness  of  the  plates  varies  from  0.12  to  0.02  inch 
in  the  specimens  measured.  It  is  interesting  that  they  are  made  of  steatite  that  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  treated  by  burning.” 

How  these  very  minute  plates  were  bored  remains  an  unsolved  problem,  for  the 
holes  in  them  average  0.369  mm.  in  diameter  and  are  sometimes  far  from  round.  The 
polish  caused  by  the  boring  tool  is  well  seen  in  Pi.  LXXXVI,  a,  6.  Possibly  they  were  held 
by  moisture  on  the  tip  of  the  finger  and  a fine  metal  point  used,  a task  that  could  be  easily 
performed  by  a person  with  good  sight;  the  stone,  moreover,  is  extremely  soft.  The  beads 
may  well  have  been  rounded  off  after  they  had  been  tightly  strung  together  on  a wire 
or  thread. 

Plate  XClll.  Nos.  1-4  are  masses  of  stone  ready  to  be  cut  up  for  beads.  The  first  is  a 
lump  of  crystal,  2.0  inches  in  length,  the  second  is  of  amethyst,  of  a pale  violet  colour,  and 
the  third  and  fourth  of  carnelian,  both  of  a light  pink  colour. 

The  pile  of  minute  steatite  beads.  No.  5,  was  an  e.xceptional  find.  They  were  treated 
with  a preservative  directly  they  were  uncovered  and  photographed  at  once.  The  manner 
in  which  these  beads  lie  in  lines  on  the  pile  proves  that  they  were  originally  strung 
together,  indeed,  the  microscope  has  revealed  traces  of  thread  inside  some  of  them.  They 
are  not  glazed,  and  the  stringing  may  have  been  done  as  a preliminary  to  this  process. 
Under  them  is  a little  copper  pan  that  possibly  belonged  to  a pair  of  scales  and  suggests 
that  they  were  sold  by  weight.  A small  pottery  jar  (No.  4014),  standing  1.8  inches  high 
and  containing  a large  number  of  these  beads,  was  found  in  the  “ Cutting.”  ” 

of  these  drills  has  a roughly  faceted  end  so  that  it  could  be  fi.xed  without  risk  of  turning  in  a chuck 
or  apparatus  worked  with  a bow. 

The  writer  made  the  same  mistake  when  the  first  of  these  drills  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Sq.  9/F,  loc.  404,  lev.  + 2.94  ft. 


PERSONAL  ORNAMENTS 


213 


Drs.  E.  A.  Bannister  and  G.  E.  Claringbull,  of  the  Mineral  Department  of  the  British 
Museum  (Natural  Histor)');  tvho  have  examined  some  of  these  beads,  report  on  them  as 
follows:  “The  beads  submitted  to  us  are  small  hollow  cylinders  which  vary  in  external 
diameter  from  V2  (.019  inch)  to  i mm.,  and  in  length  from  V2  to  iDmm.  When  freed 
from  loosely  adherent  soil  thev  are  pure  white  and  very  hard.  Nearly  e\'ery  bead  is 
furrowed  along  its  length  spirally,  always  in  a clockwise  direction.  It  is  not  uncommon  to 
find  two  beads  joined  together  with  the  spiral  furrowing  running  continuously  and  in 
perfect  alignment  from  one  to  the  other.  We  have  carefully  examined  alternative  views  of 
how  these  tiny  beads  were  made,  but  so  far  have  been  unable  to  reconcile  all  our  observ'a- 
tions  with  any  one  theo^)^  The  phvsical  and  chemical  data  are  conclusive,  however,  as  to 
the  material  from  which  these  beads  were  made.  Their  specific  gravity  is  2.85  and  the 
refractive  index  of  crushed  fragments  is  i .60.  The  beads  can  only  be  fused  in  the  electric 
arc,  and  then  yield  glassy  spheres  with  a lower  specific  gravity  2.72.  Magnesium  and  silicon 
but  no  other  elements  could  be  detected  with  the  quartz  spectograph  and  X-ray  powder 
photographs  show  that  the  beads  are  steatite  that  has  been  completely  dehydrated  and 
heated  to  a temperature  e.xceeding  i2oo°C.”®® 

The  furrowing  that  Drs.  Bannister  and  Claringbull  speak  of  strongly  supports  the 
theory  that  these  beads  were  made  from  a steatite  paste  with  tbe  aid  of  the  instruments 
shown  in  PI.  LXXX,  1-8  and  described  in  Chapter  XII.  A thick,  wet  substance  forced 
through  a minute  copper  tube  would  necessarily  show  on  its  outer  surface  any  imperfections 
present  on  the  interior  surface  of  the  tube,  as,  for  instance,  the  seam.  The  fact  that  this 
grooving  is  continuous  and  in  alignment  on  two  beads  adhering  together,  further  increases 
the  probability  that  these  minute  cylindrical  specimens  were  shaped  by  mechanical  means. 

Mr.  Beck  informs  me  that  similar  beads  have  been  found  at  Harappa,®“  but  that  the 
Chanhu-daro  examples  are  more  uniform  in  size  and  rather  smaller.  At  Ur  great  numbers 
were  discovered,  but  they  varied  considerably  in  size,  and,  being  associated  with  small 
beads  of  carnelian  and  lapis-lazuli,  are  thought  to  have  formed  part  of  a girdle.  The 
smallest  of  the  specimens  from  Ur  measured  0.04  inch  in  diameter. 

Some  minute  faience  beads  found  in  Egypt  many  years  ago  and  thought  extraordinary 
because  they  numbered  93  to  a grain  weight  no  longer  hold  the  record  in  this  respect, 
for  the  Chanhu-daro  beads  number  1 50  to  the  grain. 

Nos.  6-8  in  PI.  XCIII  are  three  drills  of  light  grey  or  brown  chert,  the  first  of  w'hich 
measures  2.43  inches  long,  and  came,  with  another  similar  drill,  from  the  workshop  that 
contained  the  unfinished  beads  shown  in  PI.  LXXXVI,  a,  i , 2. 

The  irregular  sandstone  block.  No.  10,  is  dark  grey  in  colour  and  measures  12.25 
inches  long.  The  deep  lateral  grooves  were  formed  by  beads  being  rubbed  into  shape 
upon  it.  Both  the  stones  Nos.  9 and  15  are  of  grey  sandstone.  The  first  measures  9.01 
inches  long;  its  top  and  base  are  nearly  flat.  Tbe  carnelian  bead  that  rests  upon  it  was 

The  above  observations  are  taken  from  the  article  by  Mackay  in  Journ.  Anier.  Orien.  Soc.,  Vol. 
57,  No.  I,  pp.  II,  12. 

These  have  not  yet  been  published. 

Petrie,  lllahun,  Kahun  and  G^iroh,  p.  23.  These  were  found  in  a small  wooden  box  in  the 
tomb  of  Maket  at  Kahun  and  are  dated  to  the  Twelfth  Dynasty. 


214 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


not  found  with  this  stone,  hut  has  heen  put  there  to  indicate  the  way  the  stone  was  usedd“^ 
Each  end  of  these  long  beads  was  rubbed  down  separately  in  order  to  preser\’e  the  barrel- 
shape  formed  in  the  preliminary'  flaking.  The  second  stone  No.  15,  is  3.2  inches  long.  It 
has  three  grooves,  slightly  polished  by  wear,  on  one  side  and  a fourth  on  the  reverse. 
Whether  an  abrasive  was  employed  with  these  stones  to  assist  the  grinding  or  only  w'ater 
was  used  is  uncertain.  Numbers  of  these  stones  in  various  shapes  and  sizes  were  taken 
from  Mound  II. 

Nos.  II  and  16  are  dark  grey  sandstone  hones  in  the  form  of  animals.  The  first  is 
9.45  inches  long  and  has  four  separate  feet.  The  eyes  are  in  relief  and  the  figure  once 
possessed,  as  we  learn  from  Alohenjo-daro,  a thick,  short  tail  held  horizontally.  The  lateral 
grooves  on  the  back  prove  this  object  to  have  been  a hone.  No.  16  is  9.6  inches  long  and 
of  rougher  workmanship.  Exactly  similar  and,  in  one  case,  better  preserved  animal  figures 
have  come  from  Mohenjo-daro;  there,  too,  they  were  used  as  hones. These  figures 
resemble  a mongoose  rather  than  any  other  animal. 

Nos.  12  and  13  are  bead-making  implements  either  of  copper  or  bronze.  They  appear 
in  outline  in  Pi.  LXXX,  i , 2,  and  a detailed  description  of  them  will  be  found  in 
Chapter  XII. 

The  separate  beads  shown  in  No.  14  come  from  different  parts  and  levels  of  Mound  II. 
The  longest  specimen  (c),  of  yellow  agate,  measures  3.63  inches  in  length  and  is  slightly 
rectangular  in  section.  Its  flaking  had  been  completed  and  it  was  ready  for  its  final  shaping 
on  a stone.  No.  14(b),  of  yellow  agate,  is  3.0  inches  long,  and  though  it  is  yet  far  from 
round  much  has  been  done  in  removing  its  angles.  No.  14(0)  is  a finished  carnelian  bead 
of  a clear  red  colour,  skilfully  polished  and  bored;  it  measures  2.27  inches  long. 

The  four  objects,  Nos.  17-20,  are  carnelian  nodules  with  red-brown  surfaces,  which 
were  found  with  many  others,  including  agate,  with  a number  of  unfinished  beads,  in  a 
bead-maker’s  workshop.  Some  of  these  nodules  are  so  translucent  that  it  is  possible,  despite 
their  rough  cortical  surfaces,  to  inspect  their  interiors  in  a strong  light.  Several  of  them 
that  were  broken  show  that  the  colour  inside  is  rarely  uniform;  yellow  and  brown  areas 
occur  mixed  with  the  red. 

There  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  the  beads  made  from  this  raw  material  under- 
went a further  treatment  to  redden  them.  Practically  all  the  unfinished  beads  show  mixed 
colouring,  whereas  the  finished  ones  are  usually  of  a flawless  uniform  red.  \Trious  methods 
are  used  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  India  at  the  present  day  to  convert  agates  into  carnelians 
and  it  would  seem  that  the  lapidaries  of  Chanhu-daro  were  conversant  w'ith  at  least  one 
of  them.  For  instance,  agates  or  defective  carnelians  can  be  turned  a uniform  red  by 
heating  them  in  a crucible  with  either  unslaked  lime  or  iron  filings. The  latter,  of  course, 
were  not  procurable  in  ancient  India,  but  a natural  oxide  of  iron  would,  no  doubt,  have 
been  made  to  serve  the  same  purpose. 

This  bead  measures  2.48  ins.  long  and  0.39  in.  in  diameter  in  its  middle. 

M.  1.  C.,  p.  465,  pi.  eXXX,  24;  F.  E.  M.,  p.  406,  pi.  LXXI,  24. 

Streeter,  Precious  Stones  and  Gems,  p.  47. 


Chapter  XIV 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


The  main  measurements  of  each  specimen  mentioned  in  this  Chapter,  together  with 
many  other  particulars,  will  be  found  in  the  Catalogue  of  Objects  at  the  end  of  this  book. 


OBJECTS  OE  CLAY 

Drain-pipes  (Pis.  LXXXVlll,  14-18,  XC,  30-33) 

Pottery  drain  pipes  were  evidently  much  used  at  Chanhu-daro,  but  only  in  one  place 
have  they  been  found  undisturbed.'  Although  the  two  pipes  discovered  in  Square  9/  C, 
locus  212  were  lying  close  together  when  unearthed,  they  had,  as  a matter  of  fact,  been 
removed  from  their  original  position  and  probably  belonged  originally  to  a little  privy  close 
by,  of  which  only  the  pavement  remained."  The  other  specimens  illustrated  come  from 
various  parts  of  Mound  II.  These  had  evidently  been  torn  up  and  discarded  as  not  worth 
using  again. ^ 

All  these  drain-pipes  are  the  work  of  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture  and  they 
fall  into  three  distinct  categories; 

(a)  Simple  tapered  pipes  (Pis.  LXXXVlll,  17, 18,  XC,  30,  31). 

(b)  Pipes  with  spigoted  ends  (Pis.  LXXXVlll,  14-16,  XC,  32,  33). 

(c)  Spigoted  pipes  with  projecting  flanges. 

Type  (a)  is  the  simplest  of  the  three;  examples  were  found  at  levels  ranging  from 
— 10.8  to  +8.5  feet.  No.  17  in  Pi.  LXXXVlll  has  almost  parallel  sides,  and  the  taper  in 
No.  1 8 really  commences  about  three-quarters  of  the  way  up. 

Type  (b)  has  more  or  less  well-dehned  spigoted  ends,  this  feature  being  less  noticeable 
in  the  case  of  No.  16  in  Pi.  LXXXVlll  than  in  the  other  examples.  The  tvpe  has  been 
found  at  levels  varying  from  +9.3  to  + 11.7  and  is  undoubtedly  an  improvement  on 
Type.  (a). 

Type  (c)  has  not  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro,  although  it  was  fairly  common  at 
Mohenjo-daro.^  It  differs  from  (b)  in  having  a stout  projecting  flange  round  the  base  of 
the  spigot,  an  attachment  which  doubtless  helped  to  anchor  the  pipe  itself,  as  well  as  provide 
a butt  to  the  one  that  fitted  it. 

All  these  pipes  are  wheel-made;  markings  that  occur  on  the  outside  of  some  prove  that 

1 Trench  H(i);  Pis.  Ill,  X(b),  LXXXVlll,  18,  XC,  30. 

= See  Pis.  IV,  XVI(e),  LXXXVlll,  14, 15. 

® Doubtless  these  objects  were  handled  with  some  reluctance,  as  was  certainly  the  case  with  the 
paving  bricks  of  privies. 

^ AI.  1.  C.,  pi.  LXXXIII,  5;  C E-  M.,  pis.  CVIII,  30,  CX,  35. 


215 


2i6 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


they  were  tied  round  with  cords  to  prevent  warping  or  cracking  while  being  dried  before 
baking.  They  are  made  of  ordinary  clay  plentifully  tempered  with  sand  and  lime. 

The  inside  of  a pipe  is,  as  a rule,  better  finished  than  the  outside,  except  for  unavoid- 
able wheel  striations.  It  would  seem  that  the  potter  appreciated  the  importance  of  a smooth 
interior;  a roughly  finished  exterior  would,  of  course,  be  an  advantage  in  an  object  of  this 
kind.  The  concave  sides  of  No.  1 5 are  possibly  intentional,  for  a pipe  of  this  form  was  less 
likely  to  slide  from  its  position  and  become  disconnected. 

A drain-pipe  closely  resembling  the  simple  and  older  Type  (a)  came  to  light  some 
years  ago  at  Al-'Ubaid  in  Sumer  and  belongs  to  a very  early  period.*  Type  (b)  is  represented 
in  Crete  where  it  takes  a form  verj'  much  like  No.  16  in  Pi.  LXXXVIII.®  A similar  variety 
was  in  use  at  late  as  Byzantine  times  at  Jerash  in  Transjordan. 

Pipes  very  similar  to  Type  Cc)  have  been  found  at  Tell  Asmar  in  Sumer  and  dated 
there  to  the  Third  Dynasty  of  Ur,"  and  examples  unearthed  at  Knossos  have  been  assigned 
to  the  Middle  Minoan  Period.®  The  iMinoan  pipes,  however,  differ  from  the  Indian 
examples  in  having  perforated  lugs  on  their  outside.  These  w'ere  probably  intended  to  take 
lashings  to  bind  the  various  sections  together  or,  alternatively,  to  prevent  these  sections 
from  moving  wdien  once  placed  in  position;  in  any  case,  attachments  of  this  kind  would  not 
have  been  required  for  lifting  such  light  pipes.  The  earliest  flanged  specimen  extant  comes 
from  Ur,  and  w^as  found  by  Sir  Leonard  Woolley  in  the  pre-Flood  towm  w'hich  he  dates 
to  3,500  B.  c. 

Drain-pipes  were  occasionally  placed  in  vertical  positions  at  Alohenjo-daro  and  em- 
bedded in  brickw’ork.®  At  that  site  gypsum  was  sometimes  used  for  the  joints,  whereas  at 
Chanhu-daro  mud  was  the  only  material  employed  to  lute  the  various  segments  together. 

Gutters  (PI.  XCl,  17-19) 

Gutters  w'ere  sometimes  formed  by  scooping  out  the  face  of  a brick,  as  Nos.  17  and  18 
show.  This  type  of  channel  was  frequently  used  to  carry  water  aw'ay  from  bathrooms  and 
privies  and  specimens  sometimes  appear  in  their  walls  at  pavement  level.  At  Mohenjo-daro, 
wTere  they  have  often  come  to  light  in  their  original  position,  they  took  the  water  through 
or  from  a w'all  to  a cess  pit  or  jar  in  the  street  outside.^" 

No.  17  is  an  ordinary  brick  in  which  has  been  cut  a longitudinal  channel,  3.5  inches 
wide  and  1.5  inches  deep.  A similar  channel  in  No.  18  measures  4.2  inches  wide  and  i.o 
inch  deep,  the  bases  of  both  these  hollows  being  curved.  The  end  of  the  brick  in  No.  1 8 
has  been  cut  aw'ay  slantwise  at  an  angle  of  about  45°,  either  to  fit  it  more  closely  to  another 
brick  cut  in  reverse  manner  or  to  hasten  the  flow  of  w'ater  dow'n  it;  the  floor  of  the  channel 
itself  slopes  gradually  towards  this  cut. 

® H.  R.  Hall,  A Season’s  Work  at  Ur,  p.  272,  fig.  253. 

® H.  B.  Hawes,  Gournia,  pi.  I,  fig.  22. 

^ Frankfort,  Tell  Asmar,  Khafaje  and  Khorsabad,  II,  p.  21,  fig.  14. 

® Evans,  Palace  of  Minos,  I,  pp.  141-3,  figs.  103,  104;  III,  pp.  252-3. 

« M.  1.  C.,  pi.  XLIV  (a);  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  XXXIX  (d). 

10  F.  E.  M.,  pi.  XXXVIII  (d). 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


217 


No.  19  has  been  moulded  entirely  by  hand  and  its  measurements  are  somewhat 
irregular  in  consequence,  the  width  inside  varjung  from  4.2  to  3.1  inches  and  the  inside 
height  from  3.4  inches  in  the  centre  to  2.4  and  2.7  at  either  end.  This  runnel  was  found 
inserted  in  the  end  of  the  long  pipe  drain  shown  in  PI.  X (b),  but  it  is  doubtful  whether 
it  was  made  originally  for  that  purpose.  Mohenjo-daro  has  produced  several  gutters  of  this 
kind  which  appear  to  have  been  expressly  made  to  carry  water  from  the  roofs  of  houses. 

Pottery  Tithes  (Pis.  LXXXVlll,  7-10, 12, 13,  XC,  2.4,  25) 

It  is  impossible  to  say  definitely  how  these  curious  objects  were  used.  They  always  have 
one  end,  generally  the  wider  one,  missing.  At  first  it  was  thought  that  they  might  have 
belonged  to  jars,  but  spouted  pottery,  with  the  exception  of  the  feeding-cup  type  shown 
in  PI.  XXV,  56,  60,  appears  never  to  have  been  in  use  by  the  people  of  the  Harappa 
Culture.^'  Again  the  appearance  of  the  wider  ends  of  these  tubes,  when  intact  as  in 
Pi.  LXXXVlll,  7,  8,  proves  that  they  could  never  have  been  attached  to  any  vessel.  The 
definite  flange  on  No.  8 indicates  that  this  tube  was  made  to  be  inserted  in  something. 
It  is  not  impossible  that  these  peculiar  objects  were  originally  the  nozzles  of  water-skins 
which  are  much  used  in  eastern  countries  at  the  present  day. 

About  a dozen  of  these  tubes  were  discovered  at  Chanhu-daro  at  levels  ranging  from 
— 16.2  to  +14.3  feet,  hence  they  do  not  belong  to  any  one  occupation.  Two  were 
unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro  at  low  levels.^^  All  are  fashioned  of  ordinary  clay  plentifully 
mixed  with  sand  and  mica  and  are  ornamented  with  broad  bands  of  red  paint  applied 
directly  on  the  natural  surface  of  the  potter^'.  No.  8,  which  is  6 inches  in  length,  has  a 
flanged  end  projecting  0.24  inch  above  the  surface  of  the  tube,  a feature  to  which  reference 
has  already  been  made.  The  mouths  of  Nos.  10  and  12  in  the  same  plate  and  of  Nos.  24 
and  25  in  PI.  XC  are  smoothly  finished.  The  hole  through  No.  25  grades  from  0.32  to  0.45 
inches  and  that  of  No.  24,  which  is  shown  in  line  in  Pi.  LXXXVlll,  12  measures  0.71  inch 
at  its  wider  end. 

Another  suggestion  made  is  that  these  objects  were  used  as  flue  apertures,  but  their  very 
clean  appearance,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  they  show  no  trace  of  heat  beyond  that  of 
ordinary  firing,  does  not  support  this  theory.  Again,  to  decorate  an  object  destined  for  such 
an  ordinary  purpose  would  surely  have  been  quite  unnecessary'. 

Bricks  Adapted  to  Special  Purposes  (Pis.  XCl,  14,  15,  XCll,  i,  8,  34] 

No.  14  in  PI.  XCI  is  one  of  the  many  fragments  which,  as  well  as  whole  bricks,  were 
used  as  door-sockets.  The  pivot  hole  in  this  particular  specimen  measures  1.92  inches  in 
diameter  and  0.7  inches  deep,  and  curious  dark  red  stains  in  the  smoothly  worn  cavity 
suggest  that  the  door  itself  was  either  painted  red  or  that  an  oil  of  this  colour  was  poured 
in  the  socket  to  stop  a squeak. 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CIV,  19,  evil,  18. 

M.  I.  C.,  p.  228. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  435,  pi.  CIX,  47,  53. 


2i8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  1 5 has  been  made  from  a larger  piece  of  brick,  first,  by  cutting  with  a saw  and  then 
by  rubbing  on  a flat  stone.  It  was  probably  employed  to  fill  an  awkwardly-shaped  place 
in  the  well-laid  masonry  of  some  bathroom  pavement. 

No.  I in  Pi.  XCII  shows  two  ordinary  bricks  that  once  formed  part  of  a water-chute. 
They  have  identical  slant  cuts  each  being  7.5  inches  wide  and  running  at  an  angle  of 
about  45°.  The  chute  was  probably  composed  of  more  than  these  two  bricks;  the  others 
were  possibly  thrown  aside  when  quarriers  pulled  down  the  wall  in  which  it  was  set.  No 
perfect  chutes  of  this  kind  have  as  yet  been  found  at  Chanhu-daro  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
upper  walls  of  most  of  the  houses  there  were  in  a ruinous  condition.  At  jMohenjo-daro, 
however,  many  perfect  examples  can  still  be  seen.^'* 

No.  8 in  PI.  XCII  is  a brick  that  was  made  in  a right-angled  frame  and  was  intended 
either  for  a corner  of  a wall  or,  more  probably,  to  fill  in  an  angle  in  a pavement.*"  No.  34  in 
the  same  plate  has  been  carefully  hollowed  out  along  one  of  its  longer  sides,  the  curved  cut 
being  8 inches  across  and  1.85  inches  deep.  Phis  was  perhaps  one  of  a number  of  similar 
bricks  arranged  side  by  side  to  form  a water-channel. 

Grating  (Pi.  XCII,  20} 

This  object  is  estimated  to  have  been  6.86  inches  long  and  6.0  inches  wide  when 
perfect.  It  is  undecorated  and  is  without  a slip.  The  slits,  which  were  roughly  cut  out  when 
the  clay  was  damp,  average  2.23  by  0.61  inches.  Articles  of  this  kind,  used  to  cover 
ventilation  holes,  are  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  were  made  in  stone  as  well  as  pottery. 

Pedestal  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  4,  XCII,  36} 

No.  4 in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  which  appears  again  in  photograph  in  Pi.  XCII,  36,  is  a copy 
in  pottery  of  a type  of  stone  stand  represented  at  Mohenjo-daro  by  several  examples. Our 
particular  example  was  made  on  a wheel,  is  well  finished  on  the  outside,  and  has  no  slip  or 
decoration  of  any  kind.  Its  hollow  base,  which  as  Pi.  LXXXIX  shows,  is  ver)'  uneven 
inside,  suggests  that  this  stand  had  a fixed  position.  The  shallow  flat  recess  in  its  top 
measures  2.4  inches  across  and  0.33  inch  deep. 

Such  stands  are  invariably  well  made  and  in  some  cases  decorated.  They  may  have 
been  intended  to  support  a cult  object,  though  nothing  has  as  yet  been  found  that  could 
have  fitted  them.  Several  of  these  stands  from  Mohenjo-daro  are  provided  with  dowel-holes 
in  their  recessed  tops  proving  that  something  had  been  permanently  fixed  upon  them.” 

Pottery  Tables  (Pl.XCl,  1,2, 6-8) 

With  the  e.xception  of  No.  i,  whose  top  is  too  curved  for  anything  to  have  stood 
safely  upon  it,  all  these  small  tables  may  have  been  used  as  toilet  stands. 

M.  I.  C.,  pis.  LXXIII  (c),  LXXV  (a);  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  XXXVIII  (b),  XXIX  (d). 

For  a brick  of  similar  shape  see  M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CXXX,  14. 

M.  I.  C.,  pi.  CXXXlll,  18;  F.  E.  M.,  pis.  LXXI,  21,  CIV,  22, 23,  26;  CVI,  48,  CVII,  35,  36. 

” F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CIV,  26;  CVII,  35. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


219 


No.  I is  decorated  on  all  four  sides  with  two  lightly  incised  lines  and  is  so  carefully 
and  solidly  made  that  it  still  remains  in  perfect  condition.  It  is  composed  of  a clay  that  was 
mixed  with  an  unusual  amount  of  either  coarse  hlack  sand  or  ground  hasalt.  Its  legs  show 
evident  signs  of  wear,  indicating  that  this  table  had  been  much  moved  about.  Judging  from 
its  curved  top  and  the  peculiar  grittiness  of  the  paste  of  which  it  is  made,  this  object  was 
probably  a tool  of  some  kind.  It  may  have  been  used  for  dressing  fine  leathers  by  pulling 
them  to  and  fro  across  its  rough  surface  to  remove  hair  or  tissues.  Nothing  exactly  resem- 
bling it  is  known  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

No.  2 depicts  the  upper  part  of  a table  whose  slightly  convex  top  is  covered  with  a 
cream  slip  and  ornamented  with  red  marginal  bands  and  a spot  of  the  same  colour  in  the 
middle.  It  is  without  feet  and  stands  rather  unsteadily  on  the  edges  of  its  two  longer  sides. 
The  same  slip  and  decorative  scheme  appear  on  table  No.  6:  this  last  is  of  very  rough  work- 
manship, the  underside  and  legs,  which  are  0.83  inch  square,  being  carelessly  finished. 

No.  7 has  lost  its  legs  as  well  as  both  ends.  It  has  a red  hand  round  the  sides  and  is 
cross-hatched  in  the  same  colour  on  top.  The  upper  surface  of  No.  8 is  smooth  and 
slightly  concave,  and  is  ornamented,  as  illustrated,  with  dark  red  paint  applied  on  a cream- 
coloured  wash;  its  underside  and  the  little  that  remain  of  the  legs  show  no  attention  to  finish. 

Three  other  tables  which  are  not  illustrated  average  5.49  inches  in  length.  The  first 
(No.  1057)  is  unpainted  except  for  a cream-coloured  slip;  the  second  (No.  2150)  is 
ornamented  at  each  corner  with  a pattern  in  red  paint  resembling  that  on  No.  8,  while  the 
third  (No.  2719)  has  a red  marginal  band  round  all  four  sides,  like  that  on  No.  2,  and  an 
additional  band  across  the  centre,  which  divides  the  top  into  two  compartments.'^® 

Two  small  stands  much  like  the  objects  just  described  have  appeared  at  Mohenjo-daro; 
one  of  these  is  in  stone,  the  other  in  potter)'.'® 


Portion  of  MoiiUi?)  or  Mnffle(?)  (Pis.  LXXXVIll,  1 1,  XCZ,  35) 

This  mould,  if  mould  it  be,  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  that  has  been  found  in  any 
Indus  city.  Its  flat  surface  is  filled  with  depressions  of  various  shapes  and  depths,  the  one 
marked  “ D ” being  the  largest.  The  two  holes  “ F ” and  “ K,”  though  not  deep,  may 
originally  have  held  a peg  by  which  the  missing  upper  half  was  kept  in  place.  Whth  regard 
to  the  other  cavities,  “A”  is  0.22  inch  deep  at  one  end  and  0.12  inch  deep  at  the  other. 
The  depths  of  the  remaining  holes  are  as  follows:  “B”  0.51  inch;  “C,”  0.42  inch; 

U,  0.9  inch;  h,  0.57  inch;  r,  0.12  inch;  U,  0.35  inch;  H,  0.3  inch;  1, 
0.24  inch;  “ J,”  0.15  inch;  and  “ K,”  o.i  inch.  Holes  “ H ” and  “ K ” have  rounded  bases. 

The  interiors  of  these  cavities  are  far  from  smooth  and  in  some  cases  e\'en  slightly 
undercut.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  articles  cast  in  this  mould  must  have  been  made  of  a 
substance  that  would  shrink  considerably  in  dr)'ing;  othenvise  they  could  not  have  been 
extracted  at  all.  Alternativ'ely,  we  may  not  have  a mould  here  at  all,  but  something  intended 


No.  1057:  Trench  A(3),  loc.  35,  lev.  —6.2  ft.  No.  2150:  Sq.  y/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  4-  13.3  ft. 
No.  2719:  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev.  -|-  8.2  ft. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  395,  pis.  CVIII,  28,  CIX,  23. 


220 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


to  hold  small  beads  and  the  like  while  they  were  undergoing  a firing  process.  In  the  latter 
event  the  depressions  may  have  served  as  cradles  and  a hollow  cover  may  have  enclosed  the 
whole.  In  other  words,  it  may  be  more  correct  to  describe  this  object  as  the  base  of  a muffle. 

Head-rests  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  3,  XCU,  38} 

The  head-rest  shown  in  PI.  LXXXIX,  3 is  a small  model  measuring  only  1.3  inches 
long.  It  is  made  of  grey-coloured  pottery  and  coated  with  a semi-polished  black  slip.  Taking 
into  account  the  fact  that  this  object  was  found  at  the  high  level  of  + 16.1  feet  and  that 
head-rests  were  used  only  rarely,  if  at  all,  by  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture, it 
appears  likely  that  this  little  model  was  produced  by  one  of  the  Jhukar  or  Jhangar  people, 
most  probably  by  one  of  the  latter  if  the  colour  of  its  clay  and  the  nature  of  its  slip  is 
any  criterion. 

The  very  fine  head-rest  illustrated  in  PL  XCII,  38  is  12.3  inches  in  length,  2.4  inches 
thick  at  the  base,  and  tapers  to  1.6  inches  at  the  top.  It  is  coated  with  a cherry-coloured  slip 
and  adorned  with  various  devices  in  a purplish-black  paint.  A portion  has  been  hollowed 
out  of  each  side  to  reduce  the  total  weight;  leaving  a vertical  pillar  in  the  centre  where  the 
head  would  press  most  heavily.  Perhaps  to  reduce  its  weight  still  further,  triangular  cuttings 
have  been  made  in  the  walls  on  each  side.  This  head-rest  is  in  perfect  condition  e.xcept  for  a 
small  piece  missing  from  its  left  top  end.  It  came  to  light  at  a high  level  in  the  “ Great 
Cutting”  where  it  lay  in  debris  that  had  obviously  been  washed  down  from  the  top  of 
Mound  II.  That  it  can  be  assigned  to  the  Jhukar  Period  is  certain  from  the  nature  and 
colouring  of  its  decoration. 

lnk-fot(?)  (Pixel,  3) 

This  little  object,  which  has  been  badly  knocked  about,  measures  1.89  inches  in 
height  and,  although  no  stains  or  marks  of  its  former  contents  appear  inside,  could  have 
been  used  as  an  ink-pot.  It  is  hand-made,  without  a slip,  and  of  very  careful  workmanship, 
a roll  down  each  of  its  four  corners  giving  it  distinction.  The  well  inside,  which  is  not 
perfectly  round,  averages  i.o  inches  in  diameter  and  1.52  inches  deep. 

Rolling-fins(? } (PL  XCI,  47-49] 

Pottery  cylinders  of  this  type  are  also  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  are  thought 
to  have  been  used  to  roll  out  the  thin  bread  or  cha-patis  that  are  so  much  used  in  India. 
With  the  exception  of  two  stone  specimens,  one  from  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  other  from 
Chanhu-daro,"^  these  objects  are  always  in  pottery,  generally  without  a slip  or  wash.  The 
length  of  Nos.  47-49  is  4.29,  3.3,  and  3.18  inches  respectively.  The  first  two  are  fairly 

A very  doubtful  head-rest  from  Mohenjo-daro  is  made  from  an  ordinary  brick : F.  E.  M., 
p.  428,  pi.  CVIII,  16. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  434,  pi.  CVIII,  22, 23. 

No.  2831  (not  illustrated).  Of  cherty  limestone  and  measuring  6.01  ins.  long  and  2.0  ins.  in 
diameter.  From  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  -f-  8.4  ft. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


221 


well  made,  the  last  is  not  quite  cylindrical  and  differs  from  the  others  in  having  rounded 
ends;  its  surface  shows  a considerable  amount  of  weathering. 

Whorls  (PI.  xcn,  4-6) 

These  objects  have  also  appeared  at  Mohenjo-daro  but  we  have  yet  to  understand 
how  they  were  used.  No.  4,  which  is  1.5  inches  in  diameter,  is  roughly  made  and  not 
quite  round.  A bi-conical  hole,  0.09  inch  in  diameter  in  the  centre  and  0.29  inch  on  the 
outside,  perforates  this  whorl  vertically  and  round  its  circumference  is  a shallow  groove 
measuring  o.ii  inch  wide  and  0.05  inch  deep.  No.  5 is  also  not  exact  in  shape.  It  is  of 
much  the  same  size  as  No.  4 and  has  a similar  groove  round  the  edge.  The  hole  that 
perforates  it  is  0.15  inch  in  diameter.  No.  6 is  of  better  finish.  It  measures  1.9  inches  in 
diameter  and  the  hole  through  the  centre  is  0.3  inch  wide.  The  deep  slot  encircling  it 
averages  0.22  inch  wide  and  0.33  inch  deep. 

The  generally  accepted  view  is  that  these  objects  are  spindle-whorls.  They  are 
seldom  carefully  made  and  in  some  cases  (e.  g.  No.  4)  the  holes  that  pierce  them  are  too 
small  to  have  accommodated  anything  but  a metal  spindle.  The  grooves  round  their  edges 
show  no  signs  of  wear  and  this  feature  still  remains  une.xplained. 

No.  7 in  Pl.XCII  is  a different  type.  It  measures  2.01  inches  in  diameter  and  has  a 
domed  top.  A blind  hole  in  the  centre  of  the  base  is  0.14  inch  in  diameter  and  0.39  inch 
in  depth  and  is  by  no  means  sufficient  to  hold  a spindle  securely.  Like  the  three  whorls 
just  described,  this  one  is  also  grooved  round  the  edge  to  a depth  of  o.i  inch,  but  it 
differs  from  the  others  in  having  two  small  blind  holes  in  the  middle  of  its  rounded  top, 
together  with  horizontal  holes  on  either  side  that  meet  in  the  middle  of  the  object. 

Net-sinkers  (Pi.  XCll,p,  14) 

These  two  objects,  both  of  rectangular  shape  with  grooves  down  their  opposite  sides, 
could  have  been  employed  usefully  as  net-sinkers.  No.  9,  which  measures  3.1  inches  in 
length,  is  pierced  by  an  axial  hole  0.15  inch  in  diameter.  No.  14  is  2.6  inches  long,  but 
here  the  grooves,  which  average  0.16  inch  in  width  and  depth,  do  not  coincide  properly 
at  the  ends. 

Pottery  spoon  (Pl.XCII,  2^) 

A portion  of  the  handle,  oval  in  section,  of  this  spoon  is  missing,  it  now  measures  4.6 
inches  in  length.  Roughly  made  of  ordinary'  pink  coloured  clay,  its  bowl  is  so  shallow  that 
it  could  not  have  been  of  much  use  for  anything  except  stirring,  unless  it  was  employed  as  a 
censer.  Objects  of  this  kind  are  unknown  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

Model  Tools  (PI.  LXXXIX,  24,  30) 

From  their  shape  both  these  objects  appear  to  be  copies  of  the  well  known  tvpe  of 
blade  axe  shown  in  Pi.  LXYI,  3,5,  15.  They  are  carefully  made  and  have  double-sloped 
edges. 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  419;  pis.  CV,  47,  CIX,  51,  59. 


222 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


No.  24  is  2.21  inches  long  and  its  edges  have  been  rubbed  down  square  upon  a flat 
abrasive  surface.  Its  mimic  cutting  edge  was  also  formed  in  the  same  way.  No.  30,  which 
is  2.68  inches  long,  has  slightly  bevelled  edges.  Both  these  models  were,  as  their  slight 
curvature  shows,  formed  from  thick  sherds;  they  may,  therefore,  have  been  the  work  of 
children.  A considerable  amount  of  skill  and  patience  was  exercised  in  making  them. 

Stofperi?)  (Pis.  XXIX,  69,  XCl,9) 

An  article  such  as  this  could  have  had  various  uses.  It  measures  1.56  inches  long  and 
a hole,  o.  i inch  in  diameter,  perforates  its  shank.  A string,  or  more  probably  a rivet,  was 
probably  passed  through  the  hole  to  secure  this  object  to  something. 

Pottery  Handle  (Pis.  LXXXVIII,  6,  XCI,  10) 

This  is  undoubtedly  a handle,  hut  it  appears  to  be  unfinished;  except  for  a shallow 
groove  in  the  lower  end,  there  is  at  present  no  way  of  attaching  it  to  a blade.  A hole 
to  take  the  tang  of  a knife  or  dagger  was  probably  to  be  drilled  later.  This  interesting 
object— for  handles  of  any  kind  are  exceedingly  scarce— measures  3.68  inches  in  length. 
A hole  through  its  upper  portion  communicates  with  a vertical  groove  on  either  side  so  that 
a wrist  cord  passed  through  it  might  lie  flush  with  the  surface.  Though  a trifle  out  of  shape 
the  handle  is  well  made  but  is  without  a slip  or  wash  of  any  kind.  The  fact  that  it  was 
found  as  deep  as  ~ 20.5  feet  in  the  “ Great  Cutting  ” is  particularly  interesting. 

Brick  With  Imprint  of  Animal’s  Feet  (Pi.  LXXXVl,  h,  ii) 

Bricks  bearing  the  foot-prints  of  animals  that  have  walked  over  them  while  drying  in 
some  brick-maker's  yard  are  common  objects  in  many  ancient  settlements.  The  example  we 
illustrate,  however,  is  unusual  because  it  has  been  marked  both  by  a cat  and  a dog.  Dr. 
Glover  i\I.  Allen,  who  has  examined  this  brick,  states:  “The  two  tracks  on  the  brick  must 
ha\  e been  impressed  when  it  was  freshly  laid  out  to  dry  in  the  sun.  The  one  with  the  mark 
of  the  posterior  lobe  tripartite  on  the  hind  margin  of  the  main  lobe  is  that  of  a cat  while 
the  other  with  the  hind  margin  of  the  main  lobe  evenly  outlined  is  that  of  a dog.  Claw 
marks  seem  to  be  indicated  on  that  of  the  dog  but  not  in  the  case  of  the  cat's.  The  deep 
impress  of  the  pads  and  their  spread  indicate  the  speed  of  both  animals.  Here  then  is  a 
record  of  a prehistoric  dog  chasing  a large  prehistoric  cat,  the  dog’s  imprint  slightly  over- 
lapping the  cat’s  shows  that  he  came  second.”  This  brick  has  one  end  missing  and 
measures  5.2  inches  wide  and  2.32  inches  thick. 


Pottery  Objects  Still  Unclassified  (Pis.  XCI,  16,  XCII,  17,18,21,  23,  24,  26,  35,  37) 

No.  16  in  PI.  XCI  is  2.5  inches  long.  Two  holes,  each  0.23  inch  in  diameter,  have 
been  bored  through  it,  and  it  also  has  a deep  groove  at  each  end.  Of  very  rough  workman- 
ship and  may  hav^e  been  employed  in  some  way  in  weaving. 

, ''Two  species  of  cat  may  be  mentioned  in  this  connection:  Felis  hengalensis,  which  is  the  size 
of  a domestic  cat  but  with  longer  legs,  and  Felis  viverrina,  the  Fishing  Cat  of  India  The  latter  is 

somewhat  arger  than  the  domestic  cat,  and,  as  the  print  on  the  brick  is  that  of  a large  paw,  it  is  possible 
that  an  animal  of  this  type  made  the  mark.  (G.  M A ) 6 p , is  possioie 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS  223 

No.  1 7 in  PL  XCII  is  a coil  of  pottery  that  measures  i .4  inches  across  and  is  flat  on 
the  underside.  It  is  perhaps  an  attempt  to  imitate  an  ammonite  shell.  As  already  pointed 
out,  ammonite  shells  were  reverenced  by  the  people  of  the  Harappa  Culture,  a practice 
continued  by  certain  sects  in  India  to  the  present  day. 

Numbers  of  round  or  triangular  pottery  plaques,  resembling  those  illustrated  in 
Nos.  18,  21, 23  and  26,  have  been  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  other  kindred  settlements 
of  the  Harappa  Culture.  One  triangular  specimen  was  found  in  the  “ Great  Cutting  ” at 
Chanhu-daro  at  the  level  — 15.1  feet  and  many  others  were  found  below  the  level  + 1 1.4 
feet  at  which  stratum  they  disappear.  At  Mohenjo-daro  they  occur  as  low  down  as 
— 42.0  ft."'’ 

It  is  still  uncertain  how  these  objects  were  used;  they  may  be  model  cakes  intended 
for  votive  offerings.  Some  of  them  are  carefully  shaped,  but  all  the  pottery  examples  are 
made  of  a verv  inferior  drab  or  straw-coloured  clay,  and  they  are  always  badly  fired.  No.  1 5 
is  a copy  in  sandstone  of  one  of  these  plaques  and  a very  similar  one  also  came  to  light  in 
one  of  our  trenches. 

No.  24  in  Pi.  XCII,  which  resembles  a jar-cover  in  shape,  is  1.72  inches  high.  A 
blind  hole  in  the  centre  of  its  flat  top  (or  base)  measures  0.41  inch  in  diameter  and  1.55 
inches  deep.  A number  of  very  minute  holes  round  the  edge  communicate  with  others 
irregularly  spaced  on  top.  A beaded  edge  round  the  lower  part,  or  perhaps  handle,  of  this 
object  is  broken  in  places.  This  very  curious  piece,  which  has  been  much  over-baked,  is 
now  of  a light  grey  colour.  It  is  not  impossible  that  we  have  here  the  body  of  a brush,  in 
which  case  the  hairs  would  hat'e  projected  from  the  edge  like  those  in  a modern  flue-brush. 
Examples  unearthed  at  Troy  show  that  some  of  the  brushes  used  there  had  pottery  bodies; 
in  shape,  however,  they  do  not  resemble  in  any  way  the  object  before  us."'  The  hairs  or 
fibres  in  this  obiect  must,  of  course,  have  been  inserted  after  the  body  part  had  been  baked. 
The  holes  may  have  been  formed  in  the  first  place  by  a thin  wire. 

It  is  impossible  to  provide  any  indication  of  the  real  nature  of  Nos.  35  and  37.  Both  are 
exceptionally  well  made  of  a pinkish  coloured  paste  coated  with  a thick,  unpolished,  cream- 
coloured  slip,  whose  surface  bears  numerous  straw  markings  that  show  the  nature  of  the 
fuel  used  to  bake  them  and  recall  the  similar  markings  on  much  of  the  Jhukar  pottery. 
Taking  this  latter  fact  into  account  and  also  remembering  that  these  two  objects  came  from 
the  levels  -f  15.1  and  -E  16.1  respectively,  it  is  reasonably  safe  to  assign  them  to  the 
Jhukar  Period. 

No.  35  measures  2.4  inches  long,  1.03  inches  wide,  and  2.2  inches  high,  and  is  most 
carefully  finished.  It  was  obviously  not  made  to  stand  in  any  particular  position.  No.  37  is 
4.05  inches  long  and  is  oval  in  section,  averaging  1.4  inches  wide  and  0.73  inch  thick. 
Both  ends  are  slightly  flat  and  all  angles  have  been  neatly  rounded  off.  These  objects  may 
enclose  something  of  interest;  it  may  be  desirable  at  some  future  date  to  open  them  and 
find  out. 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  429,  pi.  CXII,  4. 

No.  2159,  4.12  ins.  long.  Trench  JCO,  loc.  73,  lev.  — 7.9  ft. 

Schliemann,  llios,  p.  414,  nos.  488,  489;  Troy  and  its  Remains,  p.  297,  no.  217. 


224 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


STONE  OBJECTS 


Mace-heads  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  i6,  ly,  ig,  20, 22, 23, 25, 26,  29,  XCll,  11,  XCIII,  32-36) 


Many  examples  of  two  different  types  of  mace-heads  were  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro, 
Mound  I furnishing  no  less  than  six  specimens.  The  material  most  commonly  used  is  a 
hard,  cherty  limestone,  which  is  grey,  light  yellow,  or  cream  in  colour.  A purplish-grey 
sandstone  was  employed  for  No.  1 6 in  Pi.  LXXXIX  and  a hard,  greenish-black  stone  for 
two  others;  one  appearing  in  Pi.  XCIII,  34.^®  A globular  mace-head  made  in  pottery  was 
found  on  the  summit  of  Mound  II  and  may  he  of  Jhukar  manufacture.  This  was  a badly 
made  object  measuring  2.15  inches  in  diameter  and  1.3  inches  in  height,  pierced  by  a 
straight  hole,  0.45  inch  in  diameter.'® 

The  maces  of  the  Harappa  Culture  fall  into  three  types: 

(a)  Lentoid  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  16, 17,  XCIII,  32-34, 36). 

(b)  Spheroid  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  19-23,  25,  26,  29,  XCII,  ii,  XCIII,  35). 

(c)  Pear-shaped.  Not  represented  at  Chanhu-daro. 


Type  (a)  is  vety-  common  and  was  equally  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa. 
The  holes  that  pierce  the  heads  of  this  type  are  almost  always  conical,  showing  that  they 
were  worked  from  either  side.  Their  circumferential  edges  are  either  blunt  as  in  Pi. 
LXXXIX,  16,  or  acute  as  in  No.  1 7.  This  lentoid  form  is  probably  derived  from  a round, 
flat  pebble,  whose  edges  were  sharpened.  I have  already  compared  this  tvpe  with  many 
European  examples,®"  but  a mace-head  that  I have  seen  in  a private  collection,  made  of  a 
highly  polished  yellow  stone  and  said  to  come  from  Shuruppak  in  Sumer,  exactlv  resembles 
in  shape  the  Indian  Type  (a).  Lentoid  maces  are  also  well  known  at  Susa  and  are  found 
there  at  levels  contemporary  with  those  of  the  Indian  sites. 

Type  (h^,  of  which  a considerable  number  was  found,  are  all,  with  the  exception 
of  the  unfinished  specimen  in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  29,  provided  with  blind  holes  in  which  their 
handles  were  originally  set.  In  some  cases,  for  instance  Nos.  19,  25,  26  in  PI.  LXXXIX  and 
No.  1 1 in  PI.  XCII,  these  holes  are  barely  deep  enough  to  hold  a handle  securely  and  they 
must  therefore  have  been  kept  in  place  by  some  other  means,  as,  for  instance,  lashings  or 
a leather  covering.  A mace-head  of  this  type  found  by  the  late  Mr.  Majumdar  in  his 
preliminar)^  investigations  at  Chanhu-daro  substantiates  this  notion.®®  The  head  in  question, 
which  is  of  alabaster,  has  a short,  blind  hole  and  is  incised  with  criss-cross  markings  that 
are  obviously  intended  to  represent  cord  fastenings. 

The  hole  in  No.  25  in  Pi.  LXXXIX  is  much  undercut,  and  this  feature  would  have 
been  of  great  advantage  if  its  handle  had  been  kept  in  place  with  a cement.  No,  29 


The  second  (No.  4103)  was  found  in  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  91,  lev.  4-  8.7  ft. 

"’No.  1492.  From  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  17.4ft. 

Prehistory,  pp.  29,  65;  The  Aryans,  p.  128. 

Mem.  Del.  en  Perse,  t.  L,  p.  194,  fig.  420;  De  Morgan,  La  Prehistoire  Orientale  t III 
fig.  I,  a.  ^ . 

Exflorations  in  Sind,  p.  44,  pi.  XII,  36. 


p.  lOI, 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


225 


in  the  same  plate  is  unfinished,  the  work  on  its  hole  being  not  even  begun.  The  deep 
groove  round  its  lower  portion  would  have  been  of  some  assistance  in  keeping  thongs  in 
place.  No.  19,  together  with  Nos.  23  and  29,  already  described,  is  distinguished  by  a 
beading  round  its  base,  a feature  present  also  on  a mace-head  from  Mohenjo-daro,^'’  and 
another  from  Tepe  Gawra  in  Iraq.^'‘ 

No.  1 1 in  Pi.  XCII,  which  measures  1.95  inches  high,  is  also  unfinished.  In  this  case 
the  hole  in  its  base,  0.9  inch  in  diameter  and  0.7  inch  deep,  was  bored  with  some  kind  of 
centre-bit  and  not  with  a tubular  drill.  The  outside  of  this  head,  as  the  photograph  shows, 
is  far  from  finished. 

Mace-heads  of  this  spheroid  form,  bored  with  blind,  and  frequently  very  shallow, 
holes  have  been  discovered  in  Burner^®  and  at  various  Persian  sites. A very  similar  type, 
but  with  a flattened  base  common  to  these  two  last  countries,  is  unknown  in  India. 

Of  Types  (a)  and  (b),  the  latter  is  the  earlier;  it  occurs  at  Chanhu-daro  as  low  as  — 3.8 
feet.  The  former  first  begins  to  appear  at  about  datum  level.  Both  types  then  continue  in 
use  together  up  to  about  +13.3  feet. 

The  pear-shaped  Type  (c)  has  not  yet  appeared  at  Chanhu-daro,  and  was  very  rare 
at  Mohenjo-daro.”  It  was  evidently  not  a favoured  form  with  the  people  of  the  Harappa 
Culture,  though  popular  in  Egypt,  Sumer,  Persia,  and  elsewhere. 

Drill-heads  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  28,  XCII,  2, 3,  loj 

The  roughly  cut,  shallow  hole  in  the  base  of  No.  28  in  Pi.  LXXXIX  measures  only  0.6 
inch  in  diameter  and  0.35  inch  deep,  but  there  seems  to  have  been  no  intention  to  carry 
it  any  further.  This  one,  which  measures  i .9  inches  high,  should  be  regarded  as  an  unused 
drill-head  rather  than  an  unfinished  mace-head. 

No.  2 in  PI.  XCII  is  1.5  inches  high  and  made  of  a white  limestone.  Signs  of  definite 
wear  inside  its  blind  hole,  which  is  0.57  inch  wide  and  0.29  inch  deep,  show  that  it  once 
formed  part  of  a lathe  or  drill.  No.  3 in  the  same  plate  measures  2.13  inches  in  diameter 
and  has  been  cut  from  a hard  black  and  white  coloured  stone;  its  cavity  is  0.88  inch  wide 
and  0.45  inch  deep. 

The  cone-shaped  object  in  Pi.  XCII,  10,  made  from  a hard  stone  of  a cream  colour 
mottled  with  red,  was  also  a drill-head.  Judging  from  its  shape  it  was  probably  a fixture  in 
a wooden  socket.  It  measures  0.93  inches  high  and  its  conical  hole,  much  polished  through 
wear,  is  1.3  inches  across  at  its  wider  end. 

Weights  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  p-ii,  XCI,  23-32) 

The  very  interesting  series  of  weights  unearthed  at  Chanhu-daro  is  dealt  with  by 


F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CIX,  35,  CX,  28. 

Speiser,  Excavations  at  Tepe  Gawra,  vol.  I,  p.  87,  pi.  XLIl,  2. 

^“Mackay,  Sumerian  Palace  and  "A"  Cemetery  at  Kish,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  p.  125, 
pi.  XXXVII,  2. 

Mem.  De'l.  en  Perse,  t.  XIII,  p.  19,  figs.  92,  93;  Speiser,  Excavations  at  Tepe  Gawra,  I,  pp.  86,  87, 
pis.  XL,  a,  2;  XLII,  I . 

F.  E.  M.,  pi.  CX,  22,  36. 


226 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Dr.  A.  S.  Hemmy  and  Miss  A.  R.  Hall  in  Chapter  XV.  There  appears  no  douht  that  these 
objects  were  actually  manufactured  on  the  site,  or  that  weight-making  was  one  of  the  crafts 
practised  there  in  conjunction  with  head-making.  Many  unfinished  examples  have  been 
found  in  bead  factories  along  with  some  exceptionally  well  made  specimens,  the  latter 
apparently  being  used  for  testing  purposes.  No.  30  in  Pi.  XCI  is  an  example  of  one  of  these 
master-weights. 

These  very  distinctive  products  of  the  Harappa  Culture  are  grouped  in  six  main  types, 
according  to  their  shape: 

(a)  Cube-shaped  (PI.  XCI,  29-32). 

(b)  Spherical  with  flattened  top  and  base  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  10,  1 1,  XCI,  27,  28). 

(c)  Cylindrical  with  flat  top  and  base  (PL  LXXXIX,  9). 

(d)  Conical  with  hole  for  rope  or  wire  handle. 

(e)  Barrel-shaped. 

(f)  Pehble-weights  (Pi.  XCI,  23-26). 

Types  (d)  and  (e)  have  not  come  to  light  at  Chanhu-daro. 

Type  (a)  is  by  far  the  most  common  and  is  followed  in  order  of  popularity  by  Types 
(b)  and  (f).  Only  one  example  was  found  of  Type  (c),  hut  this  variety  was  also  rare  at 
Mohenjo-daro.  The  large  weights  that  come  under  Type  (d)  and  those  of  barrel-form  (e) 
only  occur  in  the  upper  levels  of  Mohenjo-daro;  their  absence,  therefore,  at  Chanhu-daro 
is  not  surprising,  seeing  that,  as  already  mentioned,  the  upper  levels  of  the  latter  site  are 
equivalent  in  date  to  the  Intermediate  levels  of  the  former. 

The  pebble-weights  belonging  to  Type  (f)  were  not  uncommon  and  were  in  all 
probability  used  by  itinerant  traders  who  had  to  carr)'  about  weights  that  could  not  easily 
he  chipped  or  become  defective.  All  these  pebble  weights  have  been  rubbed  down  here  and 
there  to  make  them  as  accurate  as  possible,  but  even  so  they  do  not  conform  to  the  high 
standard  of  the  well-shaped  weights. 

Plate  LXXXIX.  No.  9 of  Type  (c)  is  unfinished  and  was  therefore  not  weighed. 
It  is  made  from  a brown  and  yellow  agate  and  stands  o.  1 1 inches  high.  No.  i o of  Type  (b) 
is  also  made  of  agate  and  is  slightly  chipped.  It  weighs  27.36  grammes  and  is  0.75  inch  high. 
No.  1 1 of  Type  (b)  is  unfinished.  It  is  0.52  inch  high  and  of  agate. 

Plate  XCI.  No.  23,  of  Type  (f),  measures  1.37  inches  long  and  made  of  a dark  grey 
pebble  flecked  with  white.  It  weighs  27. 19  grammes  and  is  fairly  regular  in  shape;  both  faces 
are  slightly  flattened  by  rubbing.  No.  24,  Type  (f),  is  1.74  inches  long.  It  is  made  of  an 
amphibole-schist,  white  in  colour  and  speckled  with  black.  In  form  it  is  an  elongated  egg 
and  its  weight  is  30.28  grammes.  No.  25,  of  Type  (f),  weighs  27.68  grammes  and  is  a 
dark  grey-green  pebble  with  lighter  bands  of  the  same  colour.  Measuring  1.4  inches  in 
length  it  is  irregular  in  shape  with  a base  that  has  been  rubbed  flat.  No.  26,  of  Type  (f), 
is  of  the  same  stone  as  No.  24.  It  is  fairly  regular  in  shape  with  a slightly  flattened  base, 
weighs  21.39  grammes  and  is  1.3  inches  long.  No.  27,  of  Type  (b),  is  of  light  red  quartzite, 

For  a fuller  description  of  these  types  see  F.  E.  M.,  pp.  400-404. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


iij 

measures  2.11  inches  high,  and  weighs  273.59  grammes.  No.  28,  Type  (b),  is  made  in  a 
quartzite  of  a dark  grey  colour.  It  is  well  made  with  a smooth  but  unpolished  surface.  Its 
weight  is  544.77  grammes,  and  it  stands  2.4  inches  high.  No.  29,  of  Type  (a),  weighs 
27.53  grammes.  It  is  cut  from  a mottled  dark  and  light  grey  chert,  measures  i.o  inch  long, 
0.98  inch  wide  and  0.76  inch  high.  It  has  a semi-polished  surface,  and  its  angles  are 
slightly  bevelled.  No.  30,  of  Type  (a),  is  made  of  agate  of  a light  brown  colour  veined 
with  white.  This  weight,  with  its  slightly  bevelled  edges,  is  so  well  finished  and  so  highly 
polished  that  it  is  possible  that  it  was  used  as  a test  piece.  Weighing  27.66  grammes,  it 
measures  i.o  inch  long  and  wide  and  0.77  inch  high.  No.  31,  of  Type  (a),  is  made  of 
yellow-grey  chert  veined  with  dark  brown.  It  is  well  made  with  carefully  rounded  angles, 
and  is  unusually  flat.  Weight  27.14  grammes  and  dimensions  i.ii  X i.ii  X 0.6  inches. 
No.  32,  of  Type  (a),  is  of  brown  agate  with  yellow  and  grey  markings.  Although  the 
sides  of  this  weight  are  not  perfectly  plane  it  is  highly  polished  and  has  carefully  bevelled 
angles.  Dimensions  0.9  X 0.9  X 0.9  inches;  weight  27.34  grammes. 

Whetstones  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  21,  XCI,  36-39,  XCIII,  9-1  r,  15,  16) 

The  stone  in  PL  LXXXIX,  21  is  an  exceptionally  well  finished  hone,  7.37  inches  in 
length,  made  of  a fine  grained  slate,  grey-green  in  colour.  The  sides  and  base  of  this  stone 
are  remarkedly  plane. 

The  other  stones  illustrated  are  of  various  shapes  and  sizes,  and  were  probably  used 
in  bead-making.  Those  shown  in  PI.  XCIII,  9-1 1, 15,  16  have  been  described  in  the 
previous  chapter  on  “ Personal  Ornaments.”  All  are  in  sandstone  of  a dark  grey  or  purple 
colour,  excepting  No.  37  in  Pi.  XCI,  which  is  cream-coloured  and  of  a finer  grade  than  the 
others.  The  irregular  slabs  in  Pi.  XCI,  36, 39  have  obviously  seen  much  service.  Blocks  of 
this  kind  were  frequently  worn  by  use  to  an  hour-glass  form,  like  that  of  No.  36.  No.  38, 
which  is  4.4  inches  long,  is  a hard,  fine-grained  stone  that  appears  once  to  have  been  a 
pebble  taken  from  a river-bed.  The  well  formed  stone  No.  44,  which  measures  9.28 
inches  long,  is  provided  with  a hand-hold  at  one  end;  its  grain  is  of  medium  fineness. 

Saddle-querns  (Pi.  XCI,  33, 40) 

These  stones  were  very  plentiful  and  all  take  more  or  less  the  shape  of  the  two 
illustrated.  No.  40  is  a top  view  of  one.  They  are  made  of  a hard,  grey-brown  porous 
rock  of  igneous  origin,  and  their  undersides  are  invariably  rounded  and  roughly  trimmed, 
as  is  seen  in  No.  33.  To  prevent  them  from  rocking  while  in  use  they  must  have  been 
set  in  a wooden  support  or  in  well  packed  earth. 

“Curr)'  stones”  was  the  name  given  to  these  objects  by  our  Sindhi  labourers,  but 
it  is  unlikely  that  they  were  used  exclusively  for  grinding  herbs.  It  would,  however,  have 
been  difficult  to  grind  loose  grain  on  their  curved  and  narrow  surfaces.  The  practice  in 
some  parts  of  India  today  is  to  soak  the  grain  overnight  and  after  removing  the  husks  to 
grind  the  wet  mass  on  a stone  to  a kind  of  dough;  possibly  this  method  was  in  use  at 
Chanhu-daro  and  other  kindred  cities.  The  preliminary  wetting  process  assists  the  grinding 


228 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


very  considerably.  Tbe  long  upper  stone  used  on  these  querns  was  held  in  both  hands  at 
right  angles  to  the  lower  and  in  time  w^ear  reduced  the  upper  stone  to  much  the  same 
shape  as  the  nether  one.  These  stones  average  15  inches  in  length  and  are  found  at  all 
levels;  their  kind  is  well  known  on  most  ancient  sites  of  the  Near  and  Middle  East. 

Leather-hlock(? ) (Pi.  XCI,  41) 

Made  from  a cherty  limestone  of  a light  brown  colour,  this  object  measures  3.61  inches 
long  and  possibly  belonged  to  a leather  worker.  Its  smooth  and  markedly  convex  face  shows 
signs  of  much  polish  through  w’ear.  It  would  seem  once  to  have  been  a large  pebble  and  its 
lower  rounded  part  was  probably  fixed  to  a bench  or  upon  a post.  Stones  similar  to  this 
one  in  shape  and  material  have  been  unearthed  at  Mohenjo-daro. 

Palettes  (Pi.  XCl,  34, 42, 43) 

At  least  twelve  of  these  objects  w'ere  found,  hut  few  were  in  perfect  condition.  With 
one  exception  they  are  made  of  a yellow  or  light  brown  coloured  stone  possessing  a fine, 
close  grain,  with  the  hardness  of  4-5  (Moh  s scale).  They  vary  from  3.02  to  4.91  inches  in 
length,  and  from  0.2  to  0.7  inches  in  thickness,  and  all  are,  or  were,  of  much  the  same 
shape  as  that  of  the  three  illustrated.  Their  upper  surfaces,  and  occasionally  their  lower, 
bear  grooves  caused  by  something  that  had  been  used  upon  them,  as  for  instance  in  No.  43. 
The  reverse  sides  of  these  slabs  are  often  rounded  and  uneven,  presenting  quite  a different 
appearance  to  their  upper  surfaces,  w'hich  were  remarkably  plane  before  work  had  been 
started  upon  them.  One  of  these  stones  (not  illustrated)  is  coated  underneath  with  a 
yellow  deposit  that  looks  ver)'  much  like  the  remains  of  a cement  used  to  fasten  it  down.®® 

No.  34  is  4.91  inches  in  length.  Its  once  flat  upper  surface  has  become  concave 
through  wear  and  a shallow  groove  runs  down  its  axis.  Its  reverse  side  is  roughly  finished 
and  slightly  convex.  Use  has  been  made  of  both  sides  of  No.  42,  which  is  4.08  inches  in 
length.  No.  43,  which  is  4.21  inches  long,  has  a polished  upper  surface  bearing  a shallow 
longitudinal  depression;  it  is  irregular  in  thickness  and  has  a roughly  finished  underside. 

What  was  used  upon  these  fine  grained  stones  can  only  be  conjectured.  Beads 
would  have  made  longer  and  narrower  grooving.  That  these  stones  had  been  subjected  to 
considerable  pressure  is  shown  by  the  number  of  broken  specimens  found.  They  are 
unknown  at  Mohenjo-daro,  and  at  Chanhu-daro  have  been  found  only  between  the  levels 
— 5.6  and  + 7.5  feet. 

Cylindrical  Stones  (Pis.  XCl,  45, 46,  XCII,  22) 

No  less  than  fifteen  large  stones  of  this  form  were  brought  to  light,  all  of  them  cut 
from  a cherty,  sometimes  fossiliferous  limestone,  cream  or  light  grey  in  colour.  They  average 
5.04  inches  in  height  and  12.78  inches  in  diameter.  Some  of  them  were  unfinished  and 

No.  1038.  From  Trench  D(i),  lev.  —5.6  ft.  This  particular  stone  is  black  in  colour  and 
resembles  a slate. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


229 


the  marks  of  the  tool  employed  in  dressing  them  down  still  disfigured  their  sides.  Both 
pointed  as  well  as  flat  edged  chisels  w'ere  used  to  shape  them. 

These  blocks  may  either  have  served  some  household  purpose  or  have  been  used  as 
benches  by  craftsmen.  Their  tops,  usually  slightly  convex,  often  show  the  polish  of  much 
use,  and  abrasions  on  their  flat  bases  indicate  that  they  had  been  moved  about.  They 
have  been  uncovered  at  all  levels  and  occur  as  high  as  + 16.7  feet  on  Mound  II. 

The  dimensions  of  No.  45  in  Pl.XCI  are  5.22  inches  high  and  15.4  inches  in 
diameter.  The  smooth  top  is  slightly  convex;  its  vertical  sides  show  traces  of  having  been 
ruhbed  down  with  a piece  of  coarse  sandstone.  Patches  of  polish  are  also  seen  on  its 
practically  flat  base.  The  sides  of  No.  46  have  been  trimmed  with  a pointed  tool;  its 
upper  and  lower  faces  are  smooth  and  slightly  convex.  This  block  has  a perceptible  taper, 
the  diameter  of  its  base  (12.62  inches)  being  one  inch  larger  than  that  of  the  top. 

No.  22  in  PI.  XCII  is  a top  view  of  a cylindrical  stone  measuring  4.5  inches  high  and 
1 1.85  inches  in  diameter.  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  particular  block  had  been  used  as  a 
door-socket  or  for  some  other  purpose.  A cavity  in  the  centre  of  its  top  measures  3.25 
inches  across  by  1.25  inches  deep;  two  depressions,  one  on  each  side  of  the  cavity,  are 
slightly  smaller.  All  three  holes  show  marked  striations  such  as  could  have  been  caused  by 
the  pivot  of  a door  or  perhaps  by  a revolving  stone.  An  article  very  similar  to  this  one  is 
in  the  museum  at  Mohenjo-daro.'‘° 

Ruhhers  and  Pounders  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  27,  XCU,  12, 16,  ig) 

The  curiously  formed  object  in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  27  is  probably  a rubber.  It  stands  3.97 
inches  high.  The  material  is  a fine-grained  stone,  dark-grey  in  colour,  resembling  limestone. 
Its  polished  flat  base  is  oval  in  shape.  This  was  first  regarded  as  a weight,  but  Miss  A.  R. 
Hall  of  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  after  testing  it,  reports  that  it  weighs  1647.81 
grammes  and  says  “ as  the  value  of  ratio  1600  on  the  calculated  unit  of  .856  is  1396.60  the 
difference  of  278.21  appears  well  beyond  the  average  difference.” 

No.  12  in  Pi.  XCII  stands  3.7  inches  high  and  is  a natural  nodule  of  cherty  limestone 
that  has  been  trimmed  to  suit  some  special  purpose.  It  is  quite  regular  in  shape,  though 
not  in  finish,  and  its  flat  base  bears  a slight  polish. 

No.  16  in  the  same  plate  is  a dark  brown  sandstone  cylinder,  2.07  inches  high,  with 
rounded  top  and  base.  Pounders  or  rubbers  of  this  type  are  common  objects  in  all  the 
Indus  cities. 

The  pestle.  No.  19,  has  been  shaped  from  a piece  of  dark  grey  basalt.  A portion  is 
missing  from  its  upper  end,  and  it  now  measures  4.72  inches  high.  Pounders  so  regular 
in  shape  as  this  are  far  from  common. 

Phmh-hoh(?)  (Pixel  11) 

This  irregular  mass  of  yellow-coloured  limestone  stands  2.0  inches  high;  the  groove 
round  its  upper  portion  suggests  that  it  was  used  as  a plumb-bob.  It  was  found  to  be  57.17 
grammes  when  weighed  and  is  obviously  not  a weight. 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  393,  pis.  CIV,  24;  evil,  31. 


230 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Pedestal  (Pl.XCll,  13) 

Fashioned  out  of  fine  grained  sandstone  of  a dark  red  colour,  this  little  object  was 
intended  to  support  something  that  was  fixed  in  the  recess  on  its  top.  It  is  2.03  inches  high, 
and  each  of  its  four  sides  is  divided  into  three  registers  hy  grooves  averaging  0.08  inch  wide 
and  0.04  inch  deep.  These  were  once  filled  with  slips  of  shell  inlay,  as  is  proved  hy  a 
short  length  that  was  still  in  position  when  the  pedestal  was  found.  Some  of  these  grooves 
are  provided  with  key-holes  to  improve  the  hold  of  the  cement  that  was  employed  to  keep 
the  inlay  in  place.  The  object  is  well  made  on  the  whole,  but  is  not  quite  regular  in  shape. 
It  is  akin  to  the  round  stand  (No.  36)  in  the  same  plate. 

Chert  Rihhon-flakes  (Pi.  XCUl,  6-8,  24-26) 

Flakes  of  this  description  were  struck  from  cores  similar  to  that  illustrated  in  Pi. 
XCIII,  28.  They  must  have  had  many  uses,  were  easily  and  quickly  made,  and  were  utilized 
in  most  households. 

Nos.  6-8  are  flakes  of  trapezoidal  section  whose  ends  have  been  retouched  to  conv^ert 
them  into  drills.  These  somewhat  primitive  tools  were  used  to  bore  holes  in  a certain 
type  of  bead  (Pi.  LXXXVI,a,  1,2,  3a,  3b),  as  is  explained  in  the  previous  chapter.  No.  8 
measures  1.5  inches  long. 

No.  24  in  the  group  of  flakes  below  is  4.6  inches  long.  It  was  perhaps  intended  to 
make  this  into  a saw,  for  part  of  one  of  its  edges  is  serrated. 

Chert  Saw  (Pi.  XCIU,  27) 

This  well  made  tool  was  found  with  two  other  similar  instruments.  It  measures 
4.07  inches  long  and  is  of  a light  grey  colour.  Both  its  edges  have  been  carefully  notched, 
but  no  wear  or  polish  is  visible  on  the  teeth. 

Chert  Cores  (Pi.  XCUl,  28, 29) 

The  first  object  is  a grey  coloured  core,  3.68  inches  in  length,  from  which  flakes, 
similar  to  those  described  above,  have  been  struck.  Later  on  this  core  was  used  as  a polisher, 
as  the  partial  smoothing  out  of  its  faceting  shows.  Cores  that  have  been  used  in  this  way 
as  burnishers  are  well  known  at  Mohenjo-daro.^‘  No.  29,  which  is  3.27  inches  long,  is  a 
rough  core,  light  brown  in  colour,  that  has  been  indifferently  flaked. 

Fossils  (Pi.  XCUl,  21-23) 

These  three  fossil  shells  may  have  been  kept  as  curios.  Nos.  21  and  22,  which  are 
2.71  and  1.63  inches  long  respectively,  come  from  high  levels,  and  No.  23  from  the 
" Cutting.”  As  there  are  no  limestone  outcrops  in  the  vicinity  of  Chanhu-daro,  these  objects 
must  have  been  brought  from  a distance,  possibly  from  the  borders  of  Baluchistan.  No.  22 


F.  E.  M.,  p.  396,  pi.  CVIII,  20. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


231 


was  found  in  the  same  mound  as  a piece  of  fossil  wood.^'  A small  fossil  of  a crustacean, 
found  also  at  a high  level,  was  actually  converted  into  a bead  (Pi.  LXXXII,  32).  The 
Jhukar  as  well  as  the  Harappa  people  would  appear  to  have  taken  great  interests  in  these 
relics  of  a remote  past. 

Fragment  of  Stone  Dish  (Pi.  XClll,  30) 

Of  dark  grey  steatite  and  measuring  2.55  inches  long,  this  fragment  was  once  part  of  a 
dish  whose  external  diameter  was  3.8  inches.  That  it  had  been  broken  anciently  and 
repaired  with  rivets  or  lashings  is  proved  from  the  seven  small  holes  along  two  of  its 
broken  edges. 

OBJECTS  IN  SHELL 


Jar-stof-peri?)  (Pl.LXXXlX,  13) 

This  simple  object  might  have  been  used  to  stop  the  mouth  of  a cosmetic  jar  or  to 
close  the  leg  of  a water-skin.  It  is  not  perfectly  round,  owing  to  the  shape  of  the  columella  of 
the  shell  from  which  it  was  cut.  A stopper  not  unlike  it  has  been  found  at  Mohenjo-daro.*^ 
It  measures  0.63  inch  long. 

Plumh-hoh(?)  (Pl.LXXXlX,  18) 

It  is  uncertain  whether  this  object,  which  is  fashioned  from  the  columella  of  a shell, 
was  used  as  a plumb-bob  or  worn  as  a pendant;  its  lack  of  finish  supports  the  first  theory. 
It  is  2.45  inches  long  and  the  hole  that  perforates  it  is  o.ii  inch  in  diameter. 

Large  Shell  (Pi.  XC,  i ) 

One  of  a considerable  number  of  shells  found  in  various  parts  of  Mound  II,  this  fine 
specimen  (Mttrex  Chicoreus  ramosus,  Linn.),  was  found  with  two  others  of  the  same  species 
in  a bead-maker’s  work-shop.  Shells  of  this  kind,  as  well  as  other  varieties,  were  largely  used 
in  the  manufacture  of  bangles  (Pis.  LXXVII,  6,  7,  XC,  15),  ladles,  feeding-cups,  beads 
(Pi.  LXXVIII,  13,  LXXXIII,  9,  LXXXIV,  6, 7),  and  other  articles.  They  average  in  size 
6.26  inches  long. 

Many  of  these  shells,  including  the  one  illustrated,  are  pierced  with  irregular  holes. 
This  may  have  been  done  either  to  kill  quickly  the  animal  inside  or  to  allow  ants  or  sea-lice 
to  enter  readily  and  clean  out  their  insides.  The  hole  is  rarely  large  enough  to  allow  the 
contents  of  the  shells  to  be  extracted  through  it. 

Feeding-cup  (PkXC,  2] 

Made  from  a shell  similar  to  the  one  described  above,  this  interesting  object,  which 
measures  4.82  inches  long,  has  been  embellished  by  two  incised  lines  carried  round  its 

No.  4744.  Light  brown  in  colour,  irregular  in  shape,  and  3.3  ins.  long,  from  Mound  I,  sq. 
12/J,  loc.  19,  lev.  -f  16.0  ft. 

“ M.  1.  C.,  pi.  CLVI,  6. 


232 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


open  edge.  Sumer  has  also  produeed  vessels  of  much  the  same  type,  and  these  have  long 
been  regarded  as  lamps.^"*  An  objection  to  this  identification  is  that  a flame  would  have 
blackened  and  also  calcined  the  spouts  of  these  vessels,  as  has,  in  fact,  happened  to  the 
edge  of  the  ladle  shown  in  No.  17  in  the  same  plate.  Feeding-cups  similar  have  been 
found  at  Mohenjo-daro,^*^  and  they  show  signs  neither  of  charring  nor  of  blackening.  Cups, 
of  this  type,  I am  informed,  are  commonly  in  use  in  Aladras  to-day  to  feed  young  children. 

Dishes  (Pi.  XC,  3, 4, 9, 10,22) 

The  walls  of  the  larger  shells  were  readily  converted  into  simple  dishes,  some  of 
which  are  shown  in  various  stages  of  completion.  Nos.  3,  4,  9,  10,  the  largest  of  which 
measures  3.01  inches  in  length,  have  irregularly  curved  bases  and  consequently  do  not 
stand  very  well.  No.  22,  5.71  inches  long,  is  extremely  well  finished.  A depression  on  its 
further  edge  looks  as  if  it  had  been  expressly  formed  to  provide  a thumb-hold,  and  it  is 
possible  that  this  dish  as  well  as  some  of  the  others  was  used  as  a dipper  or  spoon. 

Segments  of  Cones  (Pi.  XC,  5,  1 1,  12) 

The  head-ornaments  of  which  these  three  objects  once  formed  part  are  described  in 
the  previous  chapter. 

Ladles  (Pi.  XC,  6, 13, 14,  ly) 

No.  6,  which  measures  9.61  inches  long,  is  unfinished.  After  the  removal  of  its 
excrescences  it  would  have  resembled  No.  14  in  appearance.  No.  13  is  only  i .23  inches  long 
and  may  be  a cosmetic  spoon;  an  even  smaller  one  of  the  same  type  has  appeared  at 
Mohenjo-daro.'*®  No.  17  may  have  been  used  temporarily  as  a lamp,  for  smoke  stains  as 
well  as  calcination  have  disfigured  its  farther  edge. 

Bangles  (Pis.  LXXVll,  6, 7,  XC,  15) 

These  are  described  in  Chapter  XIII.  The  segments  in  Pi.  XC,  1 5 are  all  cut  from  one 
piece  of  shell. 

Inlays  (Pi.  XC,  7,  8 ) 

Inlays  of  any  kind  are  rare  at  Chanhu-daro,  perhaps  for  the  reason  that  the  inhabitants 
of  that  city  were  in  the  main  too  poor  to  have  used  articles  decorated  in  this  manner.  The 
two  pieces  illustrated,  which  evidently  come  from  the  same  article  or  box,  are  marked  with 
deeply  incised  lines  on  one  side  and  measure  1.5  and  1.36  inches  long  respectively.  Though 
not  actually  found  together,  they  come  from  the  same  square  on  Mound  I. 

Woolley,  Royal  Cemetery,  p.  loiCa). 

« F.  E.  M.,  p.  423,  pi.  CVI,  36. 

F.  E.  M.,  p.  422,  pi.  CVI,  33. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS 


233 


Carved  Shell  Objects  {Pi.  XC,  16, 19-21 ) 

Two  sides  of  No.  16  are  illustrated.  It  measures  3.41  inches  long  across  its  chord  and 
varies  in  width  from  0.3  to  0.19  inches  at  its  perfect  end;  its  wider  end  has  been  torn  away 
from  something  and  also  has  marks  of  burning.  The  greater  part  of  this  very  curious  object 
is  triangular  in  section,  and  one  angle  is  deeply  serrated.  It  is  suggested  that  this  object  was 
originally  one  of  a pair  set  in  the  mouth  of  an  image  of  a deity.  If  this  was  the  case,  the 
figure  must  have  presented  an  exceptionally  malignant  appearance,  though  perhaps  not 
more  so  than  some  goddess  figures  in  India  to-day. 

Nos.  19-21  are  three  different  views  of  a very  unusual  object  taken  from  the  “ Great 
Cutting”  at  the  low  depth  of  —25.1  feet.  When  it  first  appeared,  it  was  so  concreted  and 
covered  with  mud  that  it  was  mistaken  for  the  hoof  of  an  ass  and  after  hurried  drying 
and  treatment  sent  to  Boston  with  other  bones  for  identification.  Miss  A.  R.  Hall  and 
Mr.  W.  J.  Young,  to  whom  it  was  entrusted,  eventually  discovered  that  it  was  the  end  of  a 
large  shell  with  the  figure  of  a gharial,  or  fish-eating  crocodile,  carved  upon  it.^'  The 
bulbous  end  of  the  snout  and  the  nostrils  of  this  animal  can  be  clearly  seen  on  the  left 
and  right  of  the  photographs  Nos.  19  and  20  respectively,  while  some  of  its  legs,  somewhat 
out  of  proportion,  appear  in  No.  21.  This  curious  piece  of  work  has  been  accidentally  burnt 
and  is  now  black  in  colour;  its  present  polish  is  partly  due  to  the  wax  wdth  which  it  has  been 
impregnated.  It  measures  2.37  inches  high^®  and  3.2  inches  across.  It  is  difficult  to 
pronounce  the  use  of  this  object.  It  may  have  been  a cult  symbol  illustrating  the  relation 
between  the  sacred  river  Indus,  represented  by  the  crocodile,  and  the  sea,  whose  emblem 
was  perhaps  the  shell. 


OBJECTS  IN  BONE  AND  IVORY 

Various  Fittings  (Pis.  LXXXIX,  7, 15,  XC,  18) 

The  ivory  peg,  1.72  inches  long,  shown  in  Pi.  LXXXIX,  7,  is  pierced  with  a hole 
0.17  inches  in  diameter.  Though  regular  in  shape  and  showing  the  polish  of  much  wear, 
it  appears  to  have  been  carved  by  hand  and  not  turned  on  a lathe.  There  is  reason  to 
think  that  this  object  once  belonged  to  a chest;  an  almost  similar  article  was  found  at 
Mohenjo-daro.^^ 

No.  15,  also  of  ivory,  is  1.59  inches  long.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  cross-bar  of 
some  object,  on  account  of  the  tenon  at  either  end.  Three  of  its  sides  are  flat;  the  fourth  is 
slightly  rounded  and  has  in  its  centre  a blind  hole  measuring  0.14  inches  in  width  and 
depth. 

No.  18  in  Pi.  XC,  which  measures  2.51  inches  long,  has  a tenon  projecting  from  its 
perfect  end.  It  is  of  ivory  and  is  triangular  in  section.  One  face  bears  incised  hatching,  the 

This  species  of  crocodile,  common  in  the  river  Indus,  frequently  appears  on  the  amulets  of 
the  Harappa  Culture  and  was  evidently  a sacred  animal;  see  pi.  LII,  33. 

This  measurement  was  taken  when  the  object  was  in  the  position  shown  in  No.  20. 

F.  E.  M.,  pis.  CIX,  3,  CX,  14. 


234 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


other  two  are  curiously  ornamented  with  a series  of  transverse  parallel  markings,  originally 
filled  in  with  a red  pigment,  some  traces  of  which  remain.  The  markings  and  the  shape 
of  this  object  suggest  the  horns  of  a ram  and  the  piece  may  have  come  from  a figure  of 
that  animal. 

Bone  Implement  (Pi.  XC,  23) 

This  tool,  made  from  the  rib  of  a large  ruminant,  was  found  inside  the  painted  jar 
shown  in  PI.  XXXV,  2.  It  now  measures  14.23  inches  in  length  but  was  once  longer,  for  a 
portion  is  missing  from  the  smaller  end.  In  shape  the  object  resembles  a paddle  and  has 
a slight  natural  curvature.  It  bears  no  signs  of  wear  which  could  help  to  provide  a clue  to 
its  use;  it  may  have  been  employed  to  stir  liquids  or  to  heat  linen. 

Roller  (PI.  XCl,  5) 

Made  of  bone  and  badly  warped  and  weathered,  this  roller-shaped  object  is  3.5  inches 
long.  A hole,  0.21  inch  in  diameter,  pierces  it  from  end  to  end  and  this  also  shows  signs 
of  wear.  It  is  apparent  that  we  have  here  a roller  of  some  kind  which  may  once  have 
formed  part  of  the  mechanism  of  a loom. 

Bone  Awls  (Pi.  XCll,  28-33) 

The  largest  of  these  six  awls  measures  4.37  inches  long.  Four  of  them  (Nos.  28,  30, 
31,  and  33)  are  irregular  in  shape  and  appear  to  he  the  bones  of  birds.  From  the  levels  at 
which  they  were  found,  they  should  be  of  Jhukar  fabrication.  No.  3 1 has  a point  at  one  end 
and  a flat  edge  at  the  other.  The  remaining  two  (Nos.  29  and  32)  are  of  better  finish  and 
are  assigned  to  the  Harappa  Period.  Awls  of  the  rougher  type  were  rare  at  Mohenjo-daro. 


OBJECTS  IN  OTHER  MATERIALS 

Paste  Plaques  and  Cylinders  (PI.  XCl,  12, 13,20-22) 

A considerable  number  of  these  interesting  objects  were  found  in  various  parts  of 
Mound  II  at  levels  ranging  from  —8.1  to  + 6.9  feet.  They  take  two  forms,  either  flat  and 
rectangular  (Nos.  21,  22)  or  cylindrical  with  a slight  taper  (Nos.  12  and  13).  They  are 
composed  of  a white,  porous  paste  with  a texture  like  a fine  pumice  but  sufficiently  friable 
to  be  scraped  away  easily  with  the  finger-nail.  Though  these  articles  were  soaked  for  a 
considerable  time  in  water  to  remove  salt  deposits,  they  were  not  found  to  be  soluble  in  this 
liquid  to  any  extent  and  the  paste  holds  together  extremely  well.°“  Dr.  A.  Lucas,  who  has 
examined  one  of  these  paste  objects,  states  that  they  are  made  of  finely  divided  silica  and 

Some  of  these  plaques  have  unfortunately  become  stained  by  rust,  owing  to  being  placed  in 
an  iron  pan. 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS  235 

possibly  constitute  the  body  material  of  faience,  an  opinion  with  which  the  present  writer 
is  in  agreement. 

It  would  appear  that  these  slabs  and  cylinders  were  kept  in  readiness  to  be  converted 
later  into  a paste  from  which  various  faience  articles  could  be  made.  What  flux  or  cement, 
if  it  was  not  a glaze,  was  mixed  with  the  final  preparation  remains  a problem.  A mild  and 
colourless  adhesive  must  certainly  have  been  mixed  with  the  silica  particles  that  form  these 
plaques;  none  of  them,  as  far  as  can  be  seen,  shows  signs  of  any  incipient  fusing. 

Nos.  12  and  20  in  PI.  XCI  measure  3.55  and  3.9  inches  in  length  respectively.  The 
second  specimen  has  burnt  patches  of  glaze  adhering  to  one  of  its  sides.  A number  of  these 
objects  were  found  together  in  Square  9/E,  locus  171,  in  a deposit  of  ashes,  and  many 
others  were  found  in  the  trenches  cut  on  the  northern  side  of  Mound  II.  These  last  may 
have  been  washed  down  from  a higher  position. 

Stick  of  Red  Ochre  (Pi.  XCII,  27) 

Lumps  of  red  ochre  of  irregular  forms  were  common  objects  at  Chanhu-daro.  No.  27, 
however,  has  been  very  carefully  shaped  and  would  seem  to  have  been  a toilet  article. 
It  has  lost  its  upper  end  and  is  now  1.75  inches  long.  In  colour  it  is  bright  red  with  a trace 
of  orange,  and  its  double-sloped  edge  was  probably  formed  by  rubbing  upon  a palette  or 
perhaps  upon  the  face  itself. 


Chapter  XV 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 

Weights  at  Chanhu-daro.  (By  A.  S.  Hemmy) 

Some  132  stone  objects  have  been  found  which  are  noted  as  probably  or  possibly 
weights.  These  have  been  tabulated  and  the  results  (Cob  HI)  tabulated  in  descending 
order  in  Table  I of  this  Chapter. 

The  nearest  ratio  to  the  Harappa  standard  of  13.625  gms.  has  been  assigned  (Col.  IV) 
and  in  Col.  V the  corresponding  value  of  the  unit  has  been  given. 

Many  of  the  specimens  are  chipped  or  broken,  others  appear  to  be  unfinished,  some 
appear  to  have  been  damaged  by  fire.  Their  condition  is  noted  in  Col.  II.  A number  are 
noted  as  doubtfully  weights.  In  the  cases  where  the  calculated  values  of  the  unit  diverge 
markedly  from  the  Harappa  standard,  it  is  unlikely  that  they  were  used  for  weighing. 
Such  are  marked  in  Col.  II  with  a question  mark.  The  remainder,  of  which  the  field 
numbers  are  underlined  in  Table  I,  have  been  used  in  the  calculation  of  the  distribution 
curve.  The  great  majority  have  units  which  lie  between  i2.6gm.  and  14.6  gm.  The  few 
divergent  cases  form  no  grouping  and  can  be  left  out  of  account. 

The  calculation  is  performed  as  follows.  Dividing  the  whole  range  into  steps  of  a 
tenth  of  a gramme  range,  the  numbers  of  specimens  differing  from  the  mid-point  value  of 
a step  by  not  more  than  a twentieth  of  a gramme  are  counted  and  the  result  is  tabulated  in 
Col.  II,  Table  II.  These  numbers  are  now  smoothed  (Col.  Ill)  by  substituting  the  value  of 
Ca+  ih  + c) /4  for  h,  where  a,  h,  and  c are  the  numbers  of  specimens  for  three  successive 
steps. 

In  Fig.  I a distribution  cur\^e  is  plotted  in  which  the  abscissa  x is  the  weight  of  the 
mid-point  of  the  step  and  + coordinate  y is  the  smoothed  value  of  the  number  of  specimens 
with  weights  within  the  range  of  the  step. 

There  is  a single  maximum,  so  only  one  standard  is  involved. 

The  Mode,  or  value  of  maximum  frequency,  has  a value  of  I3.64gm.  This  is  the 
most  probable  value  of  the  unit  from  the  data.  From  the  much  larger  number  of  specimens 
collected  at  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa  the  value  of  the  standard  has  been  calculated 
as  13.625  gm.^ 

The  standard  at  Chanhu-daro  is  evidently  the  same.  The  difference  can  readily  be 
accounted  for  from  the  paucity  of  numbers  at  Chanhu-daro  as  well  as  from  the  fact  that 
it  was  a place  of  manufacture  of  weights  so  that  many  of  the  accepted  weights  have  not 
been  finally  adjusted  to  their  correct  values,  thus  making  the  Mode  a little  high. 

The  weights  have  much  the  same  characteristics  as  shown  by  those  found  at  Mohenjo- 
daro.  The  majority  are  of  chert  and  more  or  less  cubical  in  shape  (PI.  XCI,  29-32).  There 
seem  to  be  a larger  proportion  of  misshapen  weights,  a condition  to  be  expected  at  the 
place  of  manufacture.  They  may  be  rejects. 

^ Hemmy,  “ Statistical  Treatment  of  Ancient  Weights,”  Ancient  Egypt,  Dec.,  1935,  p.  88. 

236 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


237 


In  the  list  in  Table  I,  in  order  to  obtain  a unit  approximating  to  the  Harappa  standard, 
such  ratios  as  30,  15,3, 1/24,  etc.  have  been  used.  As  ratios  involving  the  factor  3 are 
foreign  to  the  system,  the  specimens  are  probably  aberrant;  even  with  the  ratios  assigned, 
only  rarely  is  the  unit  found  a good  approximation. 

The  ratio  5/2  shown  by  one  cube  weight  and  one  doubtful  specimen,  is  a possibility, 
as  it  would  be  ten  times  the  quarter  standard,  but  as  only  three  weights  of  about  that 
standard  have  been  found  elsewhere,  the  possibility  is  dubious. 

The  data  herein  discussed  were  now  combined  with  those  of  the  previous  finds  at 


Fig.  1.  Ol5Tq,lBUTlOn  CURVE.:  Hardppo, 

Mohenjo“DOro,  and  Chdnhu  — Oaro  cornbined,  omittinq 
all  doubtful  ra+i  oa  and  weights  below  6ix  cjrammea. 

Harappa  and  Mohenjo-daro.  All  doubtful  specimens  were  rejected,  including  those  with 
unlikely  ratios,  as  well  as  all  with  weights  below  6gms.  The  smaller  weights  were 
definitely  less  accurate  than  those  weighing  between  6 gms.  and  1 50  gms.  After  this 
revision  the  number  of  specimens  within  the  range  of  each  step  is  given  in  Col.  IV,  Table 
II,  and  the  smoothed  values  in  Col.  V.  The  results  are  plotted  in  Fig.  i. 

The  value  of  the  Mode  is  13.63  gm.  (210.3  g™-)-  This  must  be  a close  approximation 
to  the  true  value  and  must  express  the  Harappa  standard  to  the  nearest  centigramme.  This 
result  was  checked  and  confirmed  by  repeating  the  process  with  the  difference  that,  instead 
of  taking  the  mid-points  of  the  steps  as  12.6,  12.7,  etc.,  the  mid-points  were  placed  at 
12.65  gms.,  12.75  gms.,  etc.  This  change  should  show  if  any  bias  in  favour  of  round 
numbers  existed. 


238 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


TABLE  I 


List  of  Weights 


I 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

Field  No. 

Condition 

Weight 

Ratio 

Unit 

Field  No. 

Condition 

Weight 

Ratio 

Unit 

5056 

be. 

1330.68  + 

100 

13-31  gm- 

2303 

g- 

27-41  — 

13.70  + 

20y^ 

g- 

544-77  + 

40 

13.62 

3822 

sc. 

27.36  — 

13-68 

3482 

unf. 

392.76  + 

30 

13-09 

3164 

sc. 

27-34  — 

13-67 

2016 

unf. 

273-59 

20 

13.68 

2.904 

sc. 

27.30  + 

13-65  + 

1287 

? 

260.52 

13-03 

2264 

g- 

27.26  + 

13-63 

5234 

? 

185.04 

15 

12.34 

881 

? 

27-19  + 

13.60  — 

2529,  ff 

sc. 

136.65 

lo 

13.66 

2867 

g- 

27-14  — 

13-57 

302.5 

P- 

136-39  + 

13.64 

1814 

g- 

27.10  + 

13-55  + 

2650 

g- 

136.04 

13.60  + 

1737 

g- 

26.98  — 

13-49  + 

4669 

be. 

133-92 

13-39 

4598 

sc. 

26.68  + 

13-34 

2474 

be. 

131-47  + 

1315  — 

2415 

unf. 

23-70  + 

11-85  + 

3593 

129.69  + 

12.97 

1096 

? 

23.12 

1 1.56 

1590 

be. 

126.58  + 

12.65 

1095 

? 

21.39 

3/2 

14.26 

2029 

g- 

120.88  — 

12.09 

17  SO 

20.89  + 

13-93 

1488 

? 

69.61 

5 

13-92 

1482 

20.24  — 

13-49 

1412 

unf. 

60.93 

12.19 

1265 

? 

^9-33 

12.89 

157 

? 

57-17  + 

4 

14.29 

3837 

? 

1 8. 1 0 

12.07 

2423 

sc. 

54-73  — 

13.68 

1888 

? 

14.90  + 

I 

14-90  + 

47s6 

sc. 

54.61 

13.65  + 

2475 

? 

14.61  + 

14.61 

5074 

? 

54.50  — 

13.62 

2659,  a 

bt. 

14.03  + 

14.03 

2326,  g 

p- 

54.36  — 

13-59 

“ ,b 

bt. 

13-97  + 

13-97 

1951 

sc. 

54-13  + 

13-53 

4058 

sc. 

13-93  + 

13-93 

1298 

? 

53-58 

13-39 

3692 

sc. 

13-85  + 

13-85  + 

3881 

be. 

52.08 

13.02 

2592 

g- 

13.80  + 

13.80  + 

4716 

sc. 

51.10 

12-77 

3116 

g- 

13-75  + 

13-75  + 

4774 

sc. 

50.72  — 

12.68 

3121 

p- 

13-71  + 

13-71 

2388,  h 

be. 

49.69  — 

12.42 

2569 

sc. 

13-68  + 

13.68 

1927 

? 

45-55  + 

11-39 

3078 

sc. 

13-64  + 

I 

13-64 

765 

? 

42.88  — 

3 

14.29 

2320 

p- 

13-51  — 

13-51 

2413 

sc. 

33-10  + 

5/2 

13-24 

1404 

sc. 

13-45  + 

13-45 

1389 

? 

32-38  + 

12.95 

3236 

? 

13-42  + 

13-42 

2545 

? 

30.39  — 

2 

15.19 

3504 

sc. 

13-41  — 

13-41 

1072 

? 

30.28  — 

15-14 

884 

? 

12.40  + 

12.40 

1055 

? 

29.15 

14.67 

3523 

? 

10.65 

10.65 

3629 

sc. 

28.87  + 

14-44 

1260 

? 

9-13  + 

2/3 

13-69 

1461 

? 

28.36  — 

2 

14.18 

2472 

? 

8.906 

13-36 

1631 

? 

28.27  + 

14-14 

2451 

sc. 

8.520 

12.88 

2388 

bt. 

28.14  + 

14.07 

921 

p- 

7-457 

Vi 

14-91 

1787 

sc. 

28.05  + 

14.03 

2326,  b 

p- 

7-345 

14.69 

4897 

sc. 

27-95+ 

13.98 

2374 

g- 

7-147 

14.29 

2760 

P- 

27.66  4- 

13-83 

3626 

sc. 

6.985 

13-97 

3189 

sc. 

27-53  — 

13-76 

557 

g- 

6-9435 

13-89 

Abbreviations : Column  II.  p.  = perfect;  g.  = good;  sc.  = slightly  chipped;  be.  = badly  chipped 
or  fractured;  unf . = unfinished;  bt.  = damaged  by  fire.  The  question  mark  denotes  doubtfully  a 
weight.  ^ 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


239 


I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

Field  No. 

Condition 

Weight 

Ratio 

Unit 

Field  No. 

Condition 

Weight 

Ratio 

Unit 

4843,  a 

g- 

6.8595 

13-72 

2326 

g- 

3.800 

15.20  — 

2461 

P- 

6.845 

13.69 

3203 

SC. 

3-644 

14.58 

2326,  h 

g- 

6.836 

13-67 

2214 

sc. 

3-543 

14.17 

. d 

unf. 

6.8255 

13-63 

4426 

g- 

3-517 

14.07 

4760 

? 

6.808 

13.62 

^543 

p- 

3.4685 

1/4 

13-87 

2306 

g- 

6.783 

13-57 

1925 

sc. 

3-4055 

13.62 

2040 

g- 

6.649 

13-30  — 

3883 

SC. 

3-405  — 

13.62 

2933 

sc. 

6.641 

13.28 

354S 

sc. 

3-3285 

13-31 

3416 

? 

6.634 

13-27 

4702 

? 

2.961 

1 1.84 

3699 

? 

6.149 

12.30  — 

4H3 

g- 

2.365 

1/6 

14.19 

”37 

? 

5-956 

II. 91 

3913 

p- 

2.063  — 

1/8 

16.50 

4900 

? 

5-471  — 

10.94 

2326,  n 

p- 

1-9395 

1/8 

15.52 

1475 

? 

4.844 

1/3 

13-43 

2317 

sc. 

1.891 

15-13 

1252 

? 

4.520 

1/3 

13-56 

1581 

? 

1.630 

13.04 

4^33 

p- 

4.227 

12.68 

00 

be. 

0.886 

1/16 

14.18 

2494 

g- 

4.040 

12.12 

2317 

g- 

0.5985 

1/24 

13.36 

2418 

g- 

3.865 

V4 

15.46 

2326 

g- 

0.5695 

1/24 

13-67 

TABLE  II 

Distribution  of  Unit 

Chanhu-daro  Combined  Chanbu-daro  Combined 


I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

Mid.-pt. 

No.  of 

No.  of 

Mid.  pt. 

No.  of 

Oo.  of 

of  Step. 

Spec. 

Smoothed 

Spec. 

Smoothed 

of  Step. 

Spec. 

Smoothed 

Spec. 

Smoothed 

12.6  gm. 

0 

0.2 

2 

1-7 

-7 

15 

12.5 

68 

62.7 

•7 

I 

0-7 

2 

1-7 

.8 

4 

7-0 

28 

35-2 

.8 

I 

I.O 

I 

1-5 

-9 

5 

4.2 

17 

19.5 

-9 

I 

I.O 

2 

1-5 

14.0 

3 

3-0 

16 

12.7 

13-0 

I 

0-7 

I 

1-5 

.1 

I 

1-7 

2 

6-7 

.1 

0 

0-5 

3 

3-5 

.2 

2 

1-5 

7 

5-7 

.2 

I 

1-7 

7 

6-5 

-3 

I 

1.2 

7 

6.2 

•3 

5 

4.0 

9 

10.2 

-4 

I 

0.7 

4 

4-7 

-4 

5 

5-0 

16 

19.7 

-5 

0 

0.2 

4 

4.0 

•5 

5 

7-7 

38 

44-7 

.6 

0 

0.0 

4 

3-0 

.6 

16 

13.0 

87 

70.0 

The  Cube  Weights  in  Boston.  (By  Ardelia  Ripley  Hall,  Department  of  Asiatic  Arts, 
Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston). 

Of  1 1 8 weights  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  58  were  sent  to  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  ^ 
in  the  division  of  the  finds.  Of  these  58,  there  were  36  cube  weights,  5 spherical  weights 
with  flat  base  and  top,  and  1 7 pebble  weights.  Only  a few  of  the  important  weights  were 
weighed  by  the  Expedition.  Those  which  remained  in  India  were  weighed  by  Dr.  Sd. 

^ A preliminary  discussion  of  the  weights  in  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  was  presented  at  the 
meetings  of  the  Archaeological  Institute  of  America,  in  December,  1937. 


240 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


M.  A.  Hamid,  Curator  of  the  Central  Asian  Antiquities  Museum  in  New  Delhi.  While 
the  weights  M'hich  came  to  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  were  first  weighed  there,  later, 
through  the  kind  cooperation  of  Professor  F.  G.  Keyes  and  Professor  F.  F.  Hamilton  of 
the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  arrangements  were  made  for  them  to  he  weighed 
by  John  E.  Tyler,  of  their  staff,  to  four  points  beyond  the  decimal  on  precise  and  delicate 
scales.  This  verification  by  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  has  proven  most 
valuable,  especially  in  consideration  of  the  smaller  cube  weights.  The  results  obtained  are 
given  in  Mr.  Hemmy’s  Table  I. 

In  Mr.  Hemmy’s  report  and  accompanying  list  of  all  weights  found,  he  has  made  a 
special  and  valued  study  of  the  frequency  of  distribution,  showing  that  the  “ mode  or 
value  of  maximum  frequency”  has  a value  of  13.64  grams.  In  connection  with  Mr. 
Hemmy’s  determination  of  the  standard  unit  of  weight  for  the  Indus  civilization  as  the  Ratio 
16  (13.63  grams),  which  he  has  so  graphically  illustrated  in  his  “Distribution  curve  for 
Chanhu-daro”  and  for  the  three  sites  of  “ Mohenjo-daro,  Harappa,  and  Chanhu-daro 
combined,”  there  is  a vast  amount  of  material  on  the  dominance  of  16  in  Indian  culture. 

John  Allan, ^ with  reference  to  Mr.  Hemmy’s  report^  that  the  ratio  16  was  most 
frequently  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,  has  stated  with  regard  to  coinage  that,  “Very  little 
is  known  concerning  the  denominations  and  standards  of  ancient  India,”  and  added, 
"...  We  shall  be  content  to  point  out  that  the  ratio  of  1 6 annas  = i rupee  goes  hack  at 
least  2,000  years  to  the  16  masakas=  1 kdrsd'pana  of  the  law-books.” 

Among  the  numerous  literary  references  which  Dr.  A.  K.  Coomaraswamy  has  been  so 
kind  as  to  bring  to  my  attention  are  those  included  in  an  “Appendix  on  So  Solasi”* 
Csolasi  meaning  sixteen).  The  author,  in  discussing  the  phrase  “not  a sixteenth  part  of” 
(which  is  comparable  to  our  own  use  of  “not  an  ounce  of”)  has  asked,  “Why  was  this 
particular  fraction  used  to  express  a minute  value?  It  is  common  in  Skt.  works  . . . , early 
and  late,  . . . and  it  became  a conventional  number,  perhaps  owing  to  the  Sankhyan 
system  of  subdividing.  I have  found  a number  of  passages  which  I give  here  (a)  to  show 
a similar  use  and  (b)  the  ideas  from  which  this  use  arose.”  In  the  passages  which  he  quotes 
the  old  formula  is  given  in  which  the  “ metaphysical  whole  ” is  thought  of  as  having 
sixteen  parts. 

Again,  regarding  the  chapter  of  the  Prasna  Upanishad,"  “Concerning  the  Person 
with  sixteen  parts,”  Professor  Hume  states,  “These  old  conceptions,  namely  that  the 
‘Ford  of  Creation’  is  sixteenfold  and  that  a human  person  also  is  sixteenfold,  are  here 
philosophically  interpreted  . . .” 

One  other  quotation,  from  the  Jatakas,”  is  especially  interesting  because  it  reveals  the 

Jolin  Allan,  Ccitulo^ue  of  tJic  Coins  of  Anciont  India.  (^A  catalogue  of  th&  Indian  coins  in  the 
British  Museum,  vol.  7,  1936),  Introd.  p.  clix. 

^ John  Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  vol.  II,  p.  596. 

^ F.  L.  Woodward,  The  Book  of  Gradual  Sayings  (.Anguttara-Nikayaj),  vol.  V,  p.  240. 

' Robert  Ernest  Hume,  The  Thirteen  Principal  Upanishads,  p.  389. 

" E.  B.  Cowell,  The  Jdtaka  or  stories  of  the  Buddha's  former  births,  vol.  I,  p.  246  ("  Mittavinda- 
Jataka,”  414). 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


241 


persistence  of  the  progression  found  in  the  Indus  weights.  “ Now  at  that  time  one  of  the 
damned  who  had  put  on  the  circlet  and  was  suffering  the  tortures  of  hell,  asked  the 
Bodhisattva— ' Lord,  what  sin  have  I committed?  ’ The  Bodhisattva  detailed  the  man’s  evil 
deeds  to  him  and  uttered  this  stanza: 

‘ From  four  to  eight,  to  sixteen  thence,  and  so 
To  thirty-two,  insatiate  greed  doth  go 
—Still  pressing  on  till  insatiety 
Doth  win  the  circlet’s  grinding  misery.’  ” 

It  is,  of  course,  well-known  today  that  the  conventional  use  of  these  numbers  was 
dependent  upon  an  ancient  usage  hitherto  unsuspected;  namely,  that  the  traditional  impor- 
tance of  16  and  the  sequence  of  4,  8,  16,  32  may  be  traced  to  the  prehistoric  civilization  of 
the  Indus  Valley.  This  is  a striking  example  of  the  imprint  which  these  prehistoric  people 
have  left  on  the  culture  of  India. 

Mr.  Hemmy  has  listed  the  Chanhu-daro  weights  under  ratios  from  the  fraction  i / 24th 
to  too.  He  has  taken  the  “value  of  maximum  frequency’’  13.64  grams  as  the  standard 
unit  of  I,  and  the  value  .856  grams  as  i /i6th.  In  the  first  report  on  Indus  weights,’  made 
by  Mr.  Hemmy,®  this  same  unit  of  13.6  grams  was  used  as  the  standard  unit  “ A ’’  with  the 
sequence  represented  as  1/4  A,  A,  2A,  4A,  etc.  Later,  in  his  report  on  the  weights  found 
at  Alohenjo-daro,®  the  smallest  weight  then  known  of  .856  grams  was  only  “ arbitrarily  ” 
taken  as  the  unit.  And  it  is  now  clear  that  it  should  be  accepted  as  a i6th  part  of  the 
standard  unit.  However,  the  fractional  weights  have  multiplied,  Chanhu-daro  has  notably 
contributed  to  the  greater  differentiation  of  small  weights  than  has  previously  been  recog- 
nized, and  there  are  39  weights  in  Table  I below  ratio  i.  In  this  discussion  of  the  cube 
weights  in  the  Vluseum  of  Fine  Arts,  as  a matter  of  convenience,  we  have  followed  the  old 
ratios  of  i to  1600.  By  avoiding  fractions,  we  believe  the  relation  of  one  weight  to  another 
in  the  series  is  more  readily  discernable.  And  there  is  no  mathematical  difference  between 
the  two  ratios,  whether  one  rises  from  r/i6  to  100,  or  from  i to  1600. 

By  transposing  the  ratios  in  Table  I from  i/i6th  to  i,  it  may  be  found  that  most 
of  the  weights  from  Chanhu-daro  fall  in  the  simple  ratios  i,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  160,  320, 
640,  and  1600,  with  the  possible  intrusion  of  doubtful  weights  in  the  ratios  24,  48,  240, 
and  480,  as  well  as  ratios  40  and  80.  The  notable  exceptions  are  fractional  ratios  of  the 
usual  series.  The  discovery  of  two  weights  (listed  as  ratio  i/24th)  in  the  ratio  of  2/3  of  i, 
or  2/3  of  the  smallest  degree  thus  far  recognized  lend  to  Chanhu-daro  the  distinction  of 
further  extending  the  system  by  one  degree.  The  excavations  of  Mohenjo-daro  by  Dr. 
Mackay  have  recently  added  to  the  upward  extension  by  weights  of  the  ratios  3200 
and  12800. 

All  of  the  35  cube  weights  in  Boston,  which  are  listed  in  Table  IV,  like  the  block 
weights  found  at  other  sites,  were  made  of  chert.  Through  the  good  offices  of  Mr.  William 

’’  A.  S.  1.,  A.  R.,  1925-1926,  p.  92. 

® See  footnote  i,  Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  vol.  II,  p.  589. 

® Ibid.,  p.  589. 


242 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


J.  Young  of  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  a group  of  ten  have  been  further  identified  by 
Dr.  Harry  Berman  of  the  Department  of  Mineralogy  at  Harvard  University  as  agate, 
chalcedony,  jasper,  and  calcite.  The  majority  are  beautifully  veined  and  banded  stones, 
opaque  or  semi-transparent.  All  were  carefully  squared  and  polished  and  occasionally  the 
edges  were  bevelled.  There  is  much  of  interest  regarding  these  excellent  examples. 
Of  the  36  in  the  list  21  are  undamaged  and  in  good  or  perfect  condition. 

The  five  spherical  weights  with  flat  base  and  top  now  in  Boston,  were  made  of  lime- 
stone, granite,  and  agate.  As  might  be  expected  from  previous  reports,  they  fall  into  the 
simple  ratios  as  the  cube  weights,  with  one  exception  which  is  unfinished  (3482,  see 
Table  I)  in  the  ratio  480. 

Most  of  the  pebble  weights  are  granite,  others  are  of  limestone.  This  limited  data 
hears  out  the  obser\'ation  already  made  by  Mr.  Hemmy  that  “ It  is  interesting  to  note 
that  all  weights  which  are  not  cubical  are  not  made  of  chert  . . . (and)  on  the  whole  not 
so  accurate.”  All  the  pebble  weights  are  only  doubtfully  regarded  as  weights.  They  are 
followed  by  a question  mark  in  Table  I.  It  is  to  these  alone  that  Mr.  Hemmy  refers  as 
probably  or  possibly  weights.”  It  may  be  well  to  add  a word  as  to  why  they  have  been 
included  at  all.  Of  the  1 7 in  Boston,  all  are  worn  smooth  like  pebbles  from  the  shore  or  a 
river  bed,  9 are  more  or  less  worked  stones  with  a flattened  base.  With  but  rare  exceptions 
they  weigh  to  the  usual  ratios  and  in  the  usual  frequency,  1 1 are  in  the  common  ratios 
8,  16,  and  32.  There  is  little  doubt  that  pebbles  were  cheap  and  practical  substitutes  for  the 
finer  cube  and  spherical  weights,  just  as  the  clay  bangles  were  made  to  answer  for  the 
bracelets  of  faience  and  metal. 

The  cube  weights,  on  the  other  hand,  are  without  the  slightest  question  weights. 
In  fact  Dr.  Mackay  regards  them  as  master-weights.  And  for  this  reason  we  regard  them  as 
worthy  of  separate  consideration.  In  omitting  the  other  types  and  all  substitute  weights 
which  are  open  to  question  we  believe  a fairer  appraisal  of  the  accuracy  of  weights  from 
Chanhu-daro  may  be  reached. 

Following  the  method  described  by  Mr.  Hemmy  “ the  calculated  unit  value  of  .865 
grams  was  obtained  for  the  27  weights  in  Boston  unmarred  or  only  slightly  chipped. 
This  is  slightly  higher  than  the  calculated  unit  weight  from  Harappa  of  .860  grams  based 
on  34  examples,  and  that  from  Mohenjo-daro of  .865  grams  based  on  113  examples.  If 

Mackay,  Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo-darc,  p.  605. 

Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  vol.  II,  p.  589:  "The  method  of  arriving 
at  the  most  probable  value  of  the  unit  was  as  follows:  a casual  inspection  of  the  weights  showed  that, 
vvith  a few  exceptions  which  were  omitted,  the  weights  fell  into  a series  of  groups  which  were  in 
simple  numerical  ratios  with  one  another.  Giving  the  smallest  the  arbitrary  value  of  unity,  the  others 
were  m simple  ratios,  2,  4,  8,  etc.  The  mean  weight  of  each  group  is  divided  by  this  ratio  and 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  specimens.  The  products  for  all  the  groups  are  added  together  and 
divided  by  the  total  number  of  specimens.  This  gives  a mean  value  for  the  group  of  smallest  weight  in 
which  every  specimen  weighed  is  allowed  equal  importance.  The  mean  values  of  all  groups  are  then 
obtained  by  multiplying  this  mean  value  by  the  ratio  already  found.  In  this  way  we  arrive  at  the 
calculated  values  . . . .”  ^ 

, . ^ Table  I.  Weights  from  Mohenjo-daro.”  The  number  of  specimens  listed  in 

this  table  is  113.  A typographical  error  appears  under  group  C,  where  9 instead  of  2 is  given  for  the 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


243 


weights  were  manufactured  at  Chanhu-daro,  it  is  possible  that  they  were  less  worn  by  use. 
Certainly,  the  limited  number  on  which  the  calculation  is  based  is  a factor.  The  calculated 
unit  value  based  on  the  174  examples  from  Harappa,  SMohenjo-daro,  and  Chanhu-daro  is 
.857.  This  unit  value  has  been  used  in  Table  IV  to  obtain  the  calculated  value  of 
the  ratios. 

The  usual  weights  are  much  the  same  as  those  found  at  Harappa  and  Mohenjo-daro. 
In  the  list  of  cube  weights  in  Boston,  the  locus  and  level  where  each  weight  was  found 
has  been  given.  The  find  spots  of  the  weights  and  their  association  with  one  another 
appear  very  suggestive  of  their  use.  Most  of  the  cube  weights  came  from  the  Harappa 
II  level  of  Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro,  and  22  came  from  one  house  and  its  immediate 
neighborhood.  (These  22  do  not  all  appear  in  Table  IV,  as  6 remained  in  India).  This 
house  is  the  bead-maker’s  shop  that  has  a room  with  flues  running  under  the  brick  floor. 
It  is  already  distinguished  for  that  unusual  feature,  and  also  for  the  abundance  of  interesting 
objects  found  in  its  rooms  and  court.  Beside  bronze  heads  and  stone  beads  of  etched 
carnelian,  lapis  lazuli,  and  steatite,  there  were  quantities  of  unfinished  beads  of  carnelian 
and  steatite  found  there,  as  well  as  the  raw  materials  for  the  stone  cutter  (nodules  of 
carnelian  and  a rock  of  cr^-stal),  and  also  stone  polishers  and  copper  and  bronze  bead- 
maker’s  tools.  This  was  the  establishment  of  a maker  of  fine  jewelr)'  of  stone  and  metal. 

In  the  small  outer  room  of  this  house  (Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215)  14  weights  and  scale-pans 
of  copper  were  discovered  and  an  additional  weight  was  found  in  the  furnace-room  (Sq. 
9/D,  loc.  287).  Of  the  15  weights  2 were  in  the  ratio  of  2/3  of  i,  2 in  the  ratio  2, 
2 in  the  ratio  4,  5 in  the  ratio  8,  2 in  the  ratio  32,  2 in  the  ratio  64. 

Just  across  the  street  (Sq.  8/D,  loc.  290)  was  i weight  of  the  ratio  16,  and  at  the 
next  corner  (Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192)'^  2 more  weights  of  the  ratio  16  were  found.  In  the 
building  on  the  north  side  of  the  bead-maker’s  shop  (Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178)  was  a weight  in 
the  ratio  4.  In  the  adjoining  house  on  the  other  side  (Sq.  9/D,  loc.  179)  were  2 weights 
of  the  ratios  64  and  160,  and  in  the  next  building  (Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208)  was  the  fine 
weight  in  the  ratio  2/3  of  8.  It  seems  probable  that  these  weights  may  have  been  scattered 
at  the  time  the  city  in  this  occupation  was  deserted.  And  we  have,  then,  substantial 
evidence  that  these  smaller  weights  (only  those  up  to  ratio  160  were  found)  were  used 
to  weigh  the  precious  metals  and  stones  used  in  the  jeweler’s  craft  and  trade.  This  theory 
was  first  proposed  by  Ridgeway.^®  It  is  not  astonishing  that  the  smallest  weights  known 
should  have  been  found  in  the  workshop  of  a lapidar}'.  It  is  possible  that  the  weights  were 
made  there  also,  but  no  unfinished  weights  were  found.  One  unfinished  seal  was  found 
in  the  corridor  leading  from  the  outer  room. 

number  of  specimens.  It  is  plain  that  this  figure  should  he  2,  from  Table  III  in  which  the  weights 
found  at  both  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa  are  listed,  from  the  list  with  expedition  numbers  given  in 
the  Appendix  I,  p.  596,  and  from  Mr.  Hemmy’s  statement,  just  below  Table  I,  that  “ Out  of  a total  of 
120  weights  selected  for  their  good  condition,  only  seven  do  not  fall  into  the  above  table  . . . .” 

Mr.  Hemmy  obtained  .857  in  his  combined  tables  for  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa. 

^^The  level  of  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192  was  4-  8.75  feet,  somewhat  lower  than  the  level  at  which  all 
the  other  weights  were  found.  This  was  probably  due  to  subsidence,  as  the  drains  under  the  street 
dropped  from  4-  8.2  feet  at  21 1 to  4-  6.7  feet  at  218. 

Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  vol.  II,  p.  589. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


244 

The  appearance  of  2 weights  in  the  ratio  of  2/3  of  i and  another  in  the  ratio  of  2/3 
of  8 with  all  the  others  in  the  usual  sequence  shows  that,  in  actual  use,  these  fractional 
weights  were  supplementary  to  the  simple  ratios  and  did  not  form  a separate  light  system. 

The  weight  in  Boston,  in  the  ratio  of  2/3  of  i (Exp.  No.  2326  D)  is  almost  a 
perfect  cube  of  brownish  jasper,  weighing  .5695  grams,  it  varies  from  the  calculated  value 
.5712  hy  only  one  thousandth  of  a gram  (.0017).  This  is  an  extraordinary'  degree  of 
accuracy,  but  no  less  remarkable  than  the  minute  beads  running  37  to  an  inch,  found  in  the 
same  room.  The  second  weight,  weighing  .5985  grams,  is  in  India.  One  other  weight  which 
might  be  included  in  this  ratio  is  from  Mohenjo-daro,  weighing  .550  grams.  Recently 
published,^**  it  was  listed  as  of  an  undetermined  ratio. 

Of  the  other  exceptional  weights  found  at  Chanhu-daro,  two  were  in  the  ratio  of 
1/3  of  8;  again  one  is  in  Boston  and  the  other  remained  in  India.  This  ratio  has  long 
been  known  and  is  designated  by  Mr.  Hemmy  in  his  table  of  Mohenjo-daro  weights  as 
“ .”  The  mean  weight  of  the  two  Mohenjo-daro  examples  is  preciselv  the  calculated  value 
of  the  ratio.  Only  the  weight  which  remained  in  India  approaches  them  in  accuracy. 

The  ratio  of  2/3  of  8 is  another  new  ratio  of  which  the  two  perfect  cube  weights 
from  Chanhu-daro  are  so  far  the  only  examples  known. 

A rectangular  block  of  grey  stone  is  in  the  ratio  2/3  of  32  and  varies  from  the 
calculated  value  by  only  1 8 grams.  However,  it  has  been  described  as  a doubtful  weight 
and  it  was  found  at  another  level.  In  addition  to  these  weights,  there  are  others  from 
Chanhu-daro  that  have  been  included,  but  they  are  not  as  accurate.  Comparable  weights 
from  Mohenjo-daro  and  Harappa  have  also  been  listed,  notably  the  sole  weight  in  the 
ratio  2/3  of  2,  which  Mr.  Hemmy  had  especially  noted,  “ B (g)  23  (from  Harappa) 
weighing  1.255  made  of  chert,  is  in  excellent  conation.  It  cannot  be  placed  with  any 
group.” 

We  have  now  assembled  a new  series  of  15  weights  from  the  three  sites,  forming 
a secondary  sequence  of  fractional  ratios.  The  ratios  2/3  of  i,  2/3  of  2,  2/3  of  4,  etc. 
to  2/3  of  32,  may  also  be  read  as  1/3  of  2.  1/3  of  4,  1/3  of  8,  etc.  to  1/3  of  64.  (It  is 
possible  that  the  missing  smallest  weight  of  1/3  of  i may  yet  be  discovered).  Again  the 
whole  series,  with  the  smallest  weight  as  i may  be  resolved  into  the  usual  sequence  of  2, 
4,  8,  16,  etc.  The  limited  number  of  fractional  weights  leads  one  to  suppose  that  they  had 
only  a special  use,  and  that  like  our  Troy  Weight,  they  were  used  in  weighing  gold,  silver, 
and  precious  stones. 

THe  use  of  thirds  in  a hinar^'^  s\stem  is  also  an  interesting  extension  of  the  mathematical 
knowledge  of  the  Indus  people.  And  in  contrast  to  the  cube  form  of  the  weiohts,  there 
have  been  found  tetrahedrons  or  small  triangular  pyramids  of  perfect  form.  One  was  found 
at  Chanhu-daro  in  the  bead-maker’s  shop  along  with  the  14  weights.  Others  have  been 
found  at  Mohenjo-daro.  All  are  most  carefully  made  of  faience,  limestone,  and  cast  bronze. 
In  each  case  all  the  sides  are  equal,  so  that  each  face  is  the  plane  surface  of  an  equilateral 

Mackay,  Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro,  pp.  604  and  607. 

Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  p.  590,  Table  I. 


Fractional  Weights  in  a Series  of  Thirds 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


245 


S a 

« i-rt  -5 

pO  ^ ^ 

G S -3 

«■>  > G 

a ^ 


<s 

o 


ro 

o N 
o o 


rO 

iTv  Tj-  11  ri  00 

O O N O 


m 

tr\ 


ir\ 


o\ 

rJ 


d 

\o 


3 ^ 
u 


pG 

cc 


rJ 

00 

PH 

rJ 

0 

0 

0 

l>s 

00 

CO 

LO 

PH 

(S 

lo 

PH 

d 

r4 

d\ 

00 

PH 

lO  ITN 

NO 

ro 

CO 

0 

CDNOO 

to 

N 

lO 

0 

0 

0 

N 

0 

ir\ 

\D  On 

LO 

ro 

r^NO 

NO 

rJ 

lo 

<s 

0 

lr\ 

ITS  Lr\ 

<S 

ro 

N q q 

ro 

q 

ri 

cq 

lo 

PH 

On 

d 

6 d 

PH 

f4 

r<  rl  N 

N 

tt 

06 

CO 

CO 

Sp 

G ,2 


§ 

C/D 


G M 

o S 

•G 

S 

X ^ 


•2 


CO 

6 

0) 

4: 

o 


r>> 

rv 

M 


Q 


o c 

2 6 
pG  .G 

C/D 


c 

O cJ 

•4-1  ‘pH 

O G 

C£3 


CO 

^3 

i 5 
-c " 
c 

CO 

p^ 

U 


'TD 

C 


ICO 

CO 

V-i 

CO 

I 


c 


CO 

n3 

6 

• 

c 

0) 

p^G 

O 


ro 

m 

ro 

NO 

<s 

CO 

cc 

rO 

<s 

ro 

<S 

N^ 

P3 

X 

a 

O CO 


CO 

*73 


a 

a 

JS 

U 


^\o 

O 2 
m 

. ro  rO 
CC  ^ ^ rf 
^ ^ o\oo 

t-L(  Q fo  Tf 


C 

o 

</> 

o 

t:Q 


'Tt 

o\ 

CS 


G 


CO 

y 

o 

? 

-§ 


rO 

ro 

00 


\D 

rr 

ro 

\0 

Q 


c 

o 

c/5 

o 

PG 


CO 

y 

G 

JS 

G 

CO 

JS 

u 


ir\ 

(S 


nj 

G 


CO 

n3 

6 

• r— V 

c 

a> 

o 


ro 

00 

ro 


ON 

NO 

ITS 

Q 


N 

o cL 
o 

NO 

& > 

a* 

5-r  8 
• vS 


O 5 

*5 

pfi 


« 

8 8 

.2  « 

§ I 


Cii 


8 < 
U4  ^ 

rt  ^ 

P^ 


pG 

op 

’a> 

& 


o >73 

p2^ 

til 


u b u ' 


NO 

NO 

N 

H 

i«G  'TS 

PH 

(S 

cS 

00 

00 

PH 

ro 

ro 

NO 

w 

w 

Uh 

U-i 

UH 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

iH 

n 9» 

10 

ro 

ro 

ro 

ro 

ro 

ro 

ro 

rO 

rO 

ro 

ro 

\ 

<s 

PH 

(S 

<S 

PH 

PH 

(S 

cS 

PH 

246 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


triangle.  The  weight  of  the  faience  tetrahedron  from  Chanhu-daro  (now  in  Boston)  offers 
no  obvious  connection  with  the  weights,  nor  would  it  seem  plausible  that  weight  would 
be  of  any  consequence  in  a faience  object  of  such  a special  form,  because  it  could  not  be 
controlled.  Rather  the  choice  of  faience  offers  an  excellent  material  for  a clean-out 
measurement  of  length  and  sharp  angles.  The  length  of  the  sides  of  the  tetrahedrons  seems 
to  bear  some  relation  to  the  length  of  the  cube  weights  in  the  ratios  8,  16,  and  32.  These 
speculations  are  very  inconclusive,  yet  the  possibility  that  these  faience  tetrahedrons  were  a 
solid  geometric  form  by  which  some  standard  of  measurement  was  established  may  be 
worthy  of  further  consideration. 


Tetrahedrons 


E.xpedition 

Numter 

Source 

Material 

Length  of 

All  Sides 
in  Inches 

References 

2326  i 

Chanhu-daro 

Faience 

I.O 

(4.7724  grams  weight) 

SD  2880 

Mohenjo-daro 

« 

0.94 

Marshall,  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civili- 
zation, vol.  II,  p.  559,  vol.  Ill,  pi.  CLIII,  40. 

C 46 

<i 

White 

limestone 

0.75 

Marshall,  loc.  cit.,  vol.  II,  p.  559,  vol.  Ill,  pi. 
CLII,4i. 

8027 

U 

Faience 

0.61 

Mackay,  Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo- 
daro,  vol.  I,  p.  572  and  pp.  577,  8;  vol.  II,  pi. 
CXXXVII,  7 

00 

0 

U 

0.70 

E.  J.  H.  Mackay,  vol.  I,  ihid.,  vol.  II  pis. 
CXXXIX,  12  drawing),  CXLII,  64  (photo). 

6386 

« 

0.85 

Mackay,  vol.  I,  ihid.-,  vol.  II,  pi.  CXLII,  73. 

6642 

Cast  Bronze 

0.9 

Mackay,  ibid.,  vol.  I;  vol.  II,  pis.  CXXXIX,  ii 
(drawing),  CXLII,  63  (photo). 

Animal  Bones 

The  expedition  is  grateful  to  Dr.  Glover  M.  Allen,  of  Harvard  University,  for  his 
identihcations  of  certain  animal  bones  from  our  site,  some  in  a bad  state  of  preservation. 

No.  1480.  Sambar  deer  (Rnsa  iinicolor').  Tip  of  tine  of  antler.  From  Sq.  8/E,  locus 
103,  level:  + 14,4  feet.  Nos.  1628,  1819,  4039,  and  4471  were  also  tines  and  pieces  of 
antler  of  the  Sambar  deer.^ 

No.  1654.  Tines  of  the  Hog  deer  (Cervus  forcinus).  From  Sq.  9/D,  locus  130,  level: 
+ 16.8  feet. 

“No.  3031.  Bos.  sp.  Bone  implement  from  an  anterior  rib  (see  Pl.XC,  23).  It  quite 
matches  that  of  a large  domestic  bull,  hut  it  is  not  possible  to  tell  whether  it  is  from  a wild  or 
domestic  animal,  or  what  breed  of  cattle.  This  tool  was  taken  from  the  inside  of  the 


Cube  Weights  in  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston 


11^ 
ft  2"^ 

U ^ > 

^ '&Dt3 

S'S  a 
c ^ ^ 
^ d3 

feS 

S s " 


fO 

so 


00 

>o 

<s 


C4 


0\ 

IS 


fl  ^ 
CO  Ofi 


00 


so 

so 


0\ 

so 

h<. 

•»}- 


o 

so 


^ E 

_00  CO 

'S  So 

^.S 


lA 

»A 

0 

irs 

lA  00 

Os 

SO 

t-4 

Os 

tT 

lA  rf 

CO 

Tj-00 

0 

0 00 

M 

so 

rJ 

0 

lA  SO 

m so 

CO 

tv 

Tt  so 

so 

so 

lA 

m 

m 

m 

Os 

lA 

Os 

Tf 

Os 

m 

Os 

lA  f4 

(S 

tv 

os 

m 

m 

m 

0 

so 

t>. 

Tj-  S^ 

0 

Tf 

so 

m 

lA 

OS 

N 

lA 

c^ 

00 

fx 

(Os 

00 

m 

lA 

r1 

00 

m 

0 

m 

<4  tv 

0 

0 

0 

00 

►H  lA 

tv 

m 

m 

Sf 

m lA 

't 

0 

l-H 

n"  so 

(O 

so 

00 

so 

*A 

m 

so 

m 

tv 

sq 

m 

m 

lAcq 

« 

lA  SO 

tv  00 

q 

so 

00 

m 

q 

tA  sO 

CO 

tv 

q 

00 

!a 

SO 

M 

s6 

6s 

4 

4 

4 

so 

tv 

t^ 

t^ 

t^co 

CO 

m 

m 

m 

m m 

m 

4 

s6 

so 

t^ 

tv  K 

4 

m 

m 

m 

ro 

m 

(S 

ro 

m 

»r\ 

lA 

lA 

N 

r4 

f4 

f4 

ri  rt 

t-i  *-t 

*-• 

0) 

N O 

r/^  C 


»-t  <S 

T+sOsO*^  wSrOS 


q\  « 

6 M 


q\  q q\  q 

6 6 


« oo  *-<1^0 

rv  q.00  00  00 

6666666  66666 


ir\  m 

6 6 


Os  rO  Os 

Tj-  ITS  lA  Tf 

6 6 6 6 


c 

o 

U 


O *3  5 - 


C3 

P3 


<D 

-a  o-i 
<u  Cu__^ 
p-i*a  ^ 
Q.-G  ID 
•tr  a DO 

t^Je  ja  ' 

^ifa 

c^  Ad  * 
M C/5  3 


ns 

oj 

a*-o 

^ S 

a d 

£ 


Of)  OC  O c 
Ad  'TS  > i 
C/5  gj  > □ 


TJ 

a 

oo 

ea 

c 1=  = 


d 

»-« 

o 


ns  'JJ 

^ ^ h. 

•S^  -3 " 

K.  « ^ 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ D 

.S°  d d 

w D w D c75 


s. 

Oi 


'T? 

oo 

c« 


g 

00  P 


U 0 


d <u 
oc^ 

<u 


d 

o 

■T}  >> 

^ 

-S  “1  = 

•d^ 


>> 

d 


TJ 


u 


>> 

d 


O o 5J  O cc  4J 

■3J  2”^ -ft 
c3'^  so 

45  C 

^3 


U 


> 


lA  00  o li*' 

o <SOOfO  fOTf^CO 

lr\  s6  Csoo  Os  ^ O 0\ 

</) 

3 ^ 

CL,  ' 


<s  oo  r^. 

-N  Os  <s  1-.  o 
4 Osoo*  6 tx 


tAt^*r\US  lAlA  iAOO 
^ iTvOOOiiS'OI^tN  OicO^^sO 
<s  tv  6 6ss6  tvco  00  NO  6 6 6 iA 


Ossq 
6s  lA 


Os  o ts 


00  ^ o 

00  sO  ^ 

m 6 


SO 

tS 


cr' 

C/) 


Os  OsCO  lA  lr\  lA  Os 

O tv  ►-1  ►«  rl  •-  tv 

►-  M Tf  <S  SH  H ^ 


u <J  o cj 
o o O O 


?T" 

cr: 


Tt  h-  W O 

<s  o moo 

<s 

6 6 6 6 


o 'o  d'd'n;  q'w'q'q  -auanriaw 

J d \'V^'W  c ww 

3 ooosco  OsOsOsOs  3OSOSSOOO 

o O » . ♦ 

•<5  o^o^cr  o^o^a'o^'::? 

^ ^ zn  c/3c/3cy^V3  .^cdvdc/dc/d 


so 


O m Tf  o tv  m <s 

iAi-<osomosOs 


Tf  I-  (S  Tf  rl 


^ CQ-  uj  Q ilT  qa  Q Q 

c/a 

. 00  00  00  OsCO  Os  Os 


d 

U 


cr  o^  CT"  cr  o^  cr 

(/D  «y3  CO  CO  CO  CO 


00 

NH  lA  lA  JA 

. S N N 

y • • ' rv 

o y O O ro 

C O C 
TtI  - - »•  ® 

\Q  Q Q 45 
O •v^\v^  U 
•I  (O'  OS  Os  d 
. . . . o 

cr  cr  cr 

CO  CO  CO  CO  H 


6 ^ 

o CO 


cr  ^ 
CO  ^ 


o o 


N 


00  tv  lA 
tvOO  •-• 
s-'  S (S 


U no  no  Q Q Q 

'v,  c d 

O'  j3  3 CO  Os  Os 

• O o • • • 

o“^n-  S--  o^  cr  o" 

CO  |<  CO  CO  CO 


s_y 

n 

43 

u 

d 


Q 

o\ 

4* 

CO 


o ^ 

.2  o 

.E 

'g  I 

C4.4  CA 

o d 
^ 2 
^.g 
s y 

d C4 
4 CO 


oc 

rt 

43 

43 

0 

SO 

0 

Tf 

lA 

00 

M 

so 

m 

CO  tv 

nf 

Os 

0\ 

tv 

0 

Os 

n Os 

Os 

mso 

TtSO 

^ m 

SO 

moo 

so 

m 

\D 

lA 

Os 

tv 

f4 

00 

lA 

f4 

tv 

Os  SO 

0 

SO 

00 

N 

m 

0 

N 

so 

<S 

Os  Ja 

lA 

m rl 

tv  N 

M 

OsCO 

H 

0 

<4 

00 

0 

lA 

St 

0 

m 

OS 

m 

lAOO 

OS 

»-4 

so 

00 

lA 

m 

lA 

NM 

SO  sO 

SO 

Os  m 

m m 

f4 

St  CO 

nr 

<4 

m 

C?S 

tv 

m 

lA 

m 

d 

<s 

<S 

fO 

m 

m 

m 

m 

<s 

fO 

m ri 

C4 

<4  N 

<4  f4 

Os 

r<  m 

't 

m 

H 

ts 

m 

<4 

m 

SO 

tv 

lA 

M 

lA 

M 

M 

O 


CO 

<S 

'f 

(4 

f4 

CO 

6 

tv 

4 

tv 

tv 

m 

lA 

> 


0 

so 

0 

00 

lA 

tv 

M 

00 

i-4 

lA 

tv 

<s 

00 

lA 

tv 

rj 

tv 

00 

lA 

•»t 

<s 

CO 

lA 

06 

m 

so 

4 

m 

f4 

CC 


o 

so 


so 


O 

m 


't 

M-l 

o 


o 

m 

N 


247 


248 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


large  painted  storage  jar  illustrated  in  Pi.  XXXV,  2 and  is  described  in  Chapter  XIV.”  From 
Sq.  7/F,  locus  1 10,  level  + 8.7  feet. 

“ No.  3820.  Antler  of  Hog  deer  (Cervus  forcinus').”  From  Mound  I,  Sq.  1 3/J,  locus 
3,  level:  + 1 5.8  feet. 

No.  5450.  A number  of  bones  found  at  a very  low  level  in  the  “Cutting”  included 
Bos.  sp.;  a fragment  of  the  forehead  of  a pig,  but  whether  of  Sus  scrofa,  wild  or  domestic,  or 
of  the  Indian  pig,  Srts  cristatus,  cannot  be  determined  from  the  small  piece  found.  Goat 
(Cafra  hirciis),  two  lower  molars;  they  match  better  in  size  those  of  the  goat  than  those 
of  sheep,  although  the  two  are  so  alike  that  they  cannot  always  he  certainly  identified. 
Sambar  deer  (Biisa  unicolor).  Fragment  of  base  of  antler  and  a piece  of  rib.  From,  Sq. 
lo/G,  locus  481,  level:  —25.1  feet. 

Shells 

We  are  indebted  to  the  Director  of  the  Zoological  Survey  of  India,  for  the  following 
information  concerning  some  shells  from  Chanhu-daro. 

Gastropods 

(1)  (Nos.  67,  332).  Cyfraea  CCypraea)  arahica  O-^inne.). 

(2)  No.  1375.  Thais  (Stramonita)  hiifo  (Lamarck). 

(3)  (No.  1662).  Oliva  COliva)  maura  (Lamarck). 

(4)  (Nos.  2147,  2927).  Telescopium  telescopmm  (Linne.). 

(5)  (2624,6).  Erosaria  (Erosaria)  lamarckii  (Gray) . 

(6)  (No.  2589).  Terehralia  palustris  (Bruguiere). 

(7)  (No.  3591).  Melanoides  tuherculatus  C^iuWer). 

(8)  (No.  4250).  Xanciis  rapa  (Lamarck). 

(9)  (No.  4392).  Tihia  curta  (Sowerby). 

Pelecypods 

(0  (Nos.  10,  279,  865, 1154,  2056,  3591).  Potomida  rajahensis  (Lea). 

(2)  (No.  164).  Potomida  favidens  CBe'nson). 

(3)  (Nos.  751,  798,  1690,  3850).  Lamellidens  (Lamellidens)  marginalis  (Lamarck). 

(4)  (Nos.  2021,  3624,  3651, 4809).  Area  QAnadar a)  granosa  (Linne.). 

(5)  (Nos.  2399, 4337).  Area  (Anadara)  inaequivalvis  (Biuguiexe). 

(6)  (No.  2656).  Indonaia  caendeus  (Lea). 

“ The  first  nine  species  are  all  Gastropods  and,  with  the  exception  of  No.  7,  are  marine 
species  which  are  fairly  widely  distributed  in  the  Indo-Pacific  waters.  No.  7 is  a freshwater 
Gastropod  which  is  found  in  confined  waters  all  over  India.” 

“ Of  the  six  Pelecypods,  Nos.  4 and  5 are  marine  forms  with  a distribution  similar  to 
those  of  the  marine  Gastropods  mentioned  above,  while  the  rest  are  freshwater  mussels, 
the  source  of  which  is  probably  some  tributary  of  the  Indus.” 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST 


249 


Identification  of  Mollusca  has  been  furnished  by  Dr.  W.  J.  Clench,  of 
University,  as  follows: 


3909 

33^ 

332 

332 

3690 

1341 

5122 

400 

865 

279 

1154 

350 

399 

165 

2056 

747 
1 185 

3114 

4395 

4629 

3436 

3324 

2818 
2991 
1 184 
4366 
4864 
276 
2408 

374 

2399 

4918 

4179 

4846 

2398 

325 

12(a) 

1152 


Conus  species  (MFA  36.  1866) 

Turbo 

Area  inaequivalis  Brug.  (MFA  36.  2342) 

(MFA  36.  2343) 

Area  rhomhea  Born 
<<  « « 

<<  <(  « 

Parreysia  species  (fresh  water) 


Cypraea  turdus  Linn  (MFA  36.  2365) 
Cypraea  acellata  Linn  (MFA  36.  2369) 
Murex  ramosus  Linn  (MFA  36.  2567) 


“ “ “ (MFA  36. 2384) 

Rostellaria  curvirostris  Linn 
Cypraea  moneta  Linn 

Fasciolaria  trapezium  Linn  (MFA  36.  2736) 

Melania  species  (MFA  36.2351) 

Cypraea  species  (MFA  36.  2370) 

Conus  hehraeus  Linn  (MFA  36.  2367) 

Potamides  telescopium  Linn  (MFA  36.  2372) 

“ (MFA  36. 2373) 

Conits— probably  textile  Linn 
Olwa  hidhosa  Bolt 

All  fresh  water  clams,  Unio.  (s.  i.)  species  (MFA  36.  2332) 

((  (i  (<  ({  ((  « 

“ “ “ “ “ “ “ (MFA  36. 2333) 


Harvard 


250 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


t(  <(  i(  *< 

219 

o <<  <<  <<  « 

3589 

<<  <<  it  tt 

279 

2656  “ “ 


<(  « 


it  ti 


(MFA  36.2341) 
(MFA  36.2331) 
(MFA  36.  2352) 
(MFA  36.2345) 


All  these  marine  forms  could  be  obtained  along  the  coast  or  from  the  river  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Indus.  (As  stated  for  M.  specimens,  M.  I.  C.,  p.  673,  note.) 


Vegetable  Remains 

The  late  Dr.  F.  J.  F.  Shaw,  Director  of  the  Imperial  Institute  of  Agricultural  Research 
in  Delhi,  has  contributed  the  following  note  on  some  samples  of  seed  that,  it  will  be 
remembered,  were  found  (see  Chap.  Ill)  in  the  upper  levels  of  Mound  II. 

“ Sample  No.  2348.  This  consists  of  grains  of  wheat  of  two  kinds:  i.  Rounded 
grains  which,  while  unlike  those  of  most  wheat  species,  strongly  resemble  those  of 
Triticum  Sphaerococctim  Percival.  They  differ  from  the  latter  slightly  in  that  the 
furrow  is  usually  extremely  shallow  and  the  grain  size  and  shape  slightly  more  variable 
than  in  the  variety  of  T.  sphaerococcum  available  at  Pusa.  T.  sphaerococciim  is  believed 
to  be  cultivated  only  in  India  though  specimens  of  it  have  also  been  recorded  from 
Persia.”  From  Square  9/E,  locus  162,  level:  + 15.3  feet. 

“ 2.  Slightly  larger  grains  of  the  ordinary  vulgare  type.  In  his  note  in  Ciirrent 
Science,^  Professor  Luthra  of  Lyallpur  states  that  in  some  samples  of  wheat  excavated 
at  Mohenjo-daro  tw'o  types  of  grain  were  found,  namely,  vulgare  type  and  compactum 
type.^  I am  inclined  to  think  that  these  two  kinds  were  similar  to  those  found  in  the 
present  sample,  and  that  possibly  Professor  Luthra  classed  one  type  as  compactum,  as 
he  may  not  have  had  any  sample  of  T.  sphaerococcum  to  look  at.  Last  year  we  received 
some  samples  of  seed  excavated  at  Harappa  and  the  wheat  from  there  was  also  of 
sphaerococcum  type.” 

“The  grains  are  completely  carbonised  and  it  was  not  possible  to  detect  any 
structural  details.” 

“ Sample  No.  2343.  This  appears  to  be  quite  dehnitely  seeds  of  the  field-pea 
CPisum  arvenseX  Most  of  the  seeds  had  lost  their  seed-coat.  The  sample  contained 
a few  seeds  of  wheat  also.”  From  Square  9/E,  locus  162,  level:  + 1 5.4  feet. 

“ Field-peas  were  also  included  in  the  samples  from  Harappa  sent  to  us  last  year.” 

“ Sample  No.  2344.  The  seed  appears  to  belong  to  a species  of  Brassica  and  is 
perhaps  that  of  rai  (B . pincea') This  was  found  in  Square  9/E,  locus  124,  level: 
-F  15.3  feet. 


Eye-powders 

Dr.  A.  Lucas,  Chemical  Advisor  to  the  Government  of  Egypt,  has  kindly  supplied 
the  following  note  on  powders  found  in  two  cosmetic  jars.  Nos.  1023  and  1411.  The 


® Vol.  IV,  No.  7,  pp.  489-90,  1936. 
p.  586. 


OBJECTS  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INTEREST  251 

first  of  these  containers  appears  in  PI.  XXVII,  91,  and  the  second  in  PI.  XXXIX,  7,  is  a 
Jhangar  vessel. 

Dr.  Lucas  remarks:  “These  tu'O  powders  are  ver)'  similar  in  composition.  They 
consist  of  rather  coarse  dark  grey  powders  with  whitish  particles.  They  do  not  contain 
either  lead  or  antimony  compounds.  I would  suggest  that  they  consist  of  (a)  coarsely 
powdered  and  incompletely  burnt  wood  ash,  (b)  coarsely  powdered  charcoal  of  very 
poor  quality,  or  (c)  soot  scraped  from  chimneys.” 

With  reference  to  a possibility  that  some  of  the  storage  jars  from  Chanhu-daro  once 
contained  wine  or  beer  we  submitted  to  Messrs  Watney  Combe  Reid  and  Co.  Ltd., 
Mortlake,  London,  a sample  of  a heavy  deposit  found  in  the  base  of  one  of  these  jars.  Their 
Head  Laboratory  favours  us  with  the  following  report: 

“ Microscopic  examination  and  chemical  analysis  showed  this  sample  to  consist 
mainly  of  calcite  (crystalline  calcium  carbonate)  with  a small  proportion  of  sharp 
angular  sand  composed  of  grains  of  quartz,  hornblende,  and  haematite.  The  whole 
was  stained  brownish  by  iron  oxide  disseminated  throughout  the  material.  No  organic 
matter  was  present  and  no  indications  were  obtained  of  the  petrified  remains  of 
vegetable  material  such  as  seed  tissue,  yeast,  etc.” 


Chapter  XVI 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 

BY 

Wilton  Marion  Krogman  and  William  Henry  Sassaman 

LIST  OF  TABLES 

Table  I.  Cranial  measurements  and  indices  of  the  Chanhu-daro  skull. 

Table  2.  Facial  measurements  and  indices  of  the  Chanhu-daro  skull. 

Table  3.  Cranio-facial  measurements  and  indices  of  the  female  Proto-Mediterranean  type. 

Table  4.  Negroid  males  at  Tepe  Hissar  compared  with  the  female  Chanhu-daro  skull. 

Table  5.  The  Chanhu-daro  skull  compared  with  female  crania  from  Tepe  Hissar  and  with  modem 
female  Naga  and  Burmese  ty'pes. 

LIST  OF  FIGURES 

Figs.  1-3.  Views  of  jar  containing  skull,  copper  and  bronze  implements  and  conch  shell.  Mound 
II,  square  7/E,  locus  324.  Level  9.2  feet.  (E.  M.).  PI.  XCIV. 

Fig.  4.  Right  laterial  view  of  skull  as  received  for  study.  (W.  H.  S.).  PI.  XCV. 

Pis®-  5'9-  Photographs  of  skull  in  facial,  left  lateral,  vertical,  occipital  and  basilar  views. 

(W.H.S.).  PL  XCV. 

Figs.  10-12.  Craniographic  drawings  in  facial,  left  lateral  and  vertical  views  (W.  M.  K.).  PI.  XCVI. 

The  location  of  the  site  and  the  circumstances  of  the  find 

In  1935-36  the  joint  expedition  of  the  American  School  of  Indie  and  Iranian  Studies 
and  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  of  Boston,  under  the  field  directorship  of  Dr.  Ernest  Mackay, 
undertook  a systematic  examination  of  Mound  II  at  Chanhu-daro,  located  “ some  twelve 
miles  east  of  the  present  bed  of  the  Indus,  about  eighty  miles  S.S.E.  of  Mohenjo-daro  ” 
(i  2,  p.  83).^  There  are  three  mounds  at  Chanhu-daro,  comprising  an  area  of  nine  acres,  but 
the  site  was  probably  originally  more  extensive.  The  alluvium  deposited  over  a long  period 
of  time  now  covers  the  lower  parts  of  the  mounds. 

According  to  Dr.  Mackay  (op.  cit.,  pp.  83-6)  there  are  represented  at  Chanhu-daro  at 
least  three  cultural  horizons:  Harappa,  Jhukar,  and  Jhangar.  The  first  period  falls  into  the 
middle  of  the  third  millennium  b.  c.,  while  the  second  period  may  go  back  to  the  opening  of 
the  second  millennium  b.  c. 

In  his  preliminary  report  Dr.  Mackay  (op.  cit.,  p.  87)  stated  that  “ no  skeletal  remains 
of  either  the  Jhukar  people  or  Harappa  people  were  found,  save  a skull  that  had  been  placed 
in  a large  storage  jar  together  with  a small  collection  of  metal  objects  and  a conch  shell.” 
No  other  human  bones  were  found,  either  associated  with  the  skull  or  representative  of 
another  individual. 

* Study  made  at  the  Laboratory  of  Anatomy  and  Physical  Anthropology,  Western  Reserve  Uni- 
versity, Cleveland.  Dr.  Krogman  is  now  at  the  University  of  Chicago. 

^ References  to  the  works  quoted  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


252 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


253 


Under  date  of  October  20,  1936,  Dr.  Mackay  wrote  (personal  correspondence)  as 
follows : 

“ This  skull  (No.  3324,  k)  was  found  in  a large  storage  jar  (No.  3324,  a)  at  the  level 
of  9.2  feet  above  datum  level,  at  Locus  324,  Mound  II.'  I enclose  a photograph  of  the  jar 
taken  as  it  was  found.  In  order  to  remove  the  jar  we  had  to  take  away  some  of  the  brick-w'ork 
resting  on  it  and  around  it,  and  when  this  had  been  done  we  removed  the  jar  (which  was 
badly  cracked  by  earth  pressure)  from  the  top  downwards.  In  doing  so  we  found  the  skull 
that  you  are  examining.  On  the  same  level  as  the  skull  a large  conch  shell  was  found  and 
beneath  a small  hoard  of  copper  and  bronze  implements.^  The  shape  of  the  jar,'‘  its  sur- 
roundings, and  the  implements  found  in  it,  definitely  fix  it  as  belonging  to  the  Harappa 
Culture  (3000  to  2600  B.  c.).” 

In  Figures  1-3  in  PI.  XCIV,  the  jar  and  skull  and  their  relationships  to  one  another 
and  adjacent  structures  are  clearly  depicted. 

The  exhumation  and  preparation  of  the  skidl 

Under  Dr.  Mackay ’s  direction,  as  seen  in  the  photographs  in  PI.  XCIV,  only  the  top, 
sides,  squamous  portion  of  the  occiput,  and  upper  portion  of  the  face  were  uncovered. 
Cranial  base  and  lower  face,  including  palate,  were  undisturbed  and  were  permitted  to 
remain  in  their  matrix  of  earth.  The  entire  skull  and  the  undisturbed  matrix  of  earth 
were  covered  with  paraffin  wax  (see  PI.  XCV,  fig.  4).  In  this  condition  the  entire  mass 
reached  the  Laboratory.® 

The  earth  covering  the  cranial  base  and  the  palate  was  removed  literally  particle  by 
particle.  No  vertebrae  were  found  and  the  mandible  was  not  present.  The  conclusion  is 
inevitable  that  mandible  and  vertebrae  were  separated  from  the  skull  before  the  skull  was 
put  in  the  jar  and  that  a sufficient  period  of  time  between  death  and  interment  (of  the  skull) 
had  elapsed  to  permit  the  complete  disassociation  of  skull  from  vertebral  column  and  upper 
jaw  from  lower  jaw. 

This  conclusion  is  strengthened  when  it  is  noted  that  a number  of  maxillary  teeth— 
right  central  and  lateral  incisors,  canine,  first  and  second  premolars,  and  left  canine  and 
first  premolar— are  missing.  Their  alveoli  are  intact,  pointing  to  post-mortem  loss.  Yet  a 
careful  search  of  the  surrounding  earth  did  not  reveal  them:  they  had  fallen  out  before 
the  skull  was  put  in  the  jar.  Further,  several  teeth,  especially  the  left  central  incisor  and 
the  right  second  molar,  are  fragmentaiyx  The  fragments  are  not  present:  the  teeth  were 
broken  and  the  fragments  lost  before  the  skull  was  put  in  the  jar.  Finally,  in  the  right  ear 
only  the  malleus  and  incus,  both  broken,  and  in  the  left  ear  only  a broken  malleus,  were 

- This  will  be  found  in  Square  7/E  in  PI.  IV. 

^ These  are  illustrated  in  pis.  LXIX,  1 1-15;  LXXVI,  5,  6. 

" PI.  XXIV,  4. 

® The  authors  of  this  report  wish  to  go  on  record  as  expressing  their  appreciation  of  the  care  with 
which  the  skull  was  e.xhumed  and  prepared  in  the  field  and  shipped  to  this  Laboratory  for  study. 

* The  excellent  procedure  throughout  renders  our  interpretation  much  more  valid. 


254 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


recovered.  Right  stapes  and  left  incus  and  stapes  were  lost,  and  the  other  ear  ossicles  broken, 
before  the  skull  was  put  in  the  jar. 

When  the  entire  skull  was  freed  from  earth  and  paraffin  it  was  found  that  the  roof, 
floor,  and  medial  wall  of  both  orbits  were  incomplete,  the  tip  of  the  nasal  bones  broken  off, 
and  the  squamous  portion  of  the  left  temporal  bone  incomplete.  Several  sutures  were 
“ sprung  ” but  were  easily  restored  to  normal  relationships.  The  entire  skull  was  hardened 
and  preserved  with  Za-pon. 

In  his  study  of  the  site  of  Chanhu-daro  Dr.  Mackay  Cop-  cit.,  p.  92)  ^ concluded 
that  “ at  least  three  floods,  the  third  of  which  was  perhaps  the  great  flood  that  led  to  the 
desertion  of  Mohenjo-daro,  have  left  their  traces  at  Chanhu-daro.  Living  on  the  banks  of 
a great  river  running  through  an  alluvial  plain  must  have  proved  even  more  disconcerting 
in  ancient  times  than  it  does  today  in  many  parts  of  the  world.”  This  observation  Ends 
interesting  confirmation  in  the  fact  that  when  the  earth  (alluvial  silt)  was  carefully  removed 
from  the  nasal  area  and  paranasal  sinuses,  especially  the  maxillarj"  sinuses,  there  was  found 
a well-marked  lamination.  The  laminae  were  so  numerous,  however,  that  they  suggested 
an  almost  seasonal  or  annual  flooding  of  the  portion  of  the  mound  in  which  the  jar  was 
found.  ^ 

Craniologic  ohservations  and  craniometric  measurements 

The  skull  is  that  of  a female.  It  is  small  and  smooth,  with  small  teeth  and  short,  broad 
palate  and  small  mastoid  processes.  The  supraorbital  ridges  are  ver)'  slightly  developed,  but 
glabella  is  relatively  quite  prominent.  The  occiput  is  smoothly  rounded,  with  very  slightly 
developed  lineae  transversae  and  a very  small  inion.  The  cranial  capacity  (average  of  10 
trials)  is  1222  c.c. 

The  skull  is  that  of  a young  adult.  Basilar  suture  is  united,  but  all  other  sutures  of 
vault  and  face  are  patent.  There  is  no  evidence  of  beginning  union.  All  muscular  impres- 
sions are  very  faint.  Endocranially  the  margins  of  the  venous  sinus  grooves  are  rounded  and 
the  grooves  are  quite  shallow.  The  meningeal  sulci  are  also  shallow  and  with  rounded 
margins.  These  characters  point  to  an  age  of  between  twenty-two  and  twenty-five  years. 

The  posterior  area  of  the  right  and  left  parietal  shows  ectocranially  a vascular  pitting, 
evidence  of  a slight  nutritional  disturbance  in  childhood,  too  slight,  however,  to  result  in  any 
aberrancy  in  the  cranio-facial  growth  pattern.  The  skull  is  that  of  an  individual  with  a 
good  health  history.'^ 

The  teeth  that  are  present— right,  first  and  second  molars,  left  central  and  lateral 
incisors,  second  premolar,  and  first  molar— do  not  in  their  morphology  present  any  unusual 
features.  The  left  first  molar  has  an  extensive  carious  lesion  located  at  the  contact  surface 
with  second  molar.  The  left  second  molar  was  lost  shortly  before  death,  since  alveolar 

® See  also  Chapter  II  of  this  book. 

" This  can  be  explained  by  surface  water  percolating  slowly  through  the  jar  in  which  this  skull 
was  found  (E.  M.). 

« We  are  indebted  to  the  late  Dr.  T.  Wingate  Todd  for  the  observations  on  age  and  on  health 
history. 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


255 


absorption  is  incomplete.  Both  third  molars  are  missing,  nor  can  any  trace  of  them  be 
discerned  in  the  X-ray.®  The  palate  is  broad  and  horseshoe-shaped,  with  the  molar  rows 
converging  posteriorly. 

Viewed  from  norma  facialis  the  face  is  seen  to  be  unusually  broad  and  flat.  In  keeping 
with  this  the  forehead  is  broad.  The  nasal  aperture  is  also  broad,  with  a tendency  to 
“ troughing  ” or  “ guttering,”  i.  e.,  lack  of  sharp  differentiation  between  lower  nasal  margin 
and  alveolar  portion  of  the  maxillae.  The  interorbital  distance  is,  on  the  other  hand,  rather 
narrow,  with  the  upper  half  of  the  nasal  bones  excessively  narrow.  The  distance  between 
nasal  floor  and  level  of  the  teeth  is  very  short.  The  orbits  are  slightly  angular  and  tend  to 
be  low.  Viewed  from  norma  lateralis  sinistra  the  facial  flatness  is  emphasized.  The  fore- 
head slopes  back  moderately  to  a low  vault  with  tendency  to  a sagittal  plateau.  The 
occipital  region— upper  half  of  the  squamous  portion  of  the  occipital  bone— is  very 
prominently  bulged  (occiput  en  chignon).  Viewed  from  norma  verticalis  the  skull  is  an 
elongate  oval,  broad  frontally,  narrower  occipitally,  with  an  increased  breadth  across  the 
parietal  eminences.  There  is  no  postorbital  constriction  and  the  temporal  areas  are  evenly 
developed.  Viewed  from  norma  occipitalis  the  skull  is  roughly  pentagonoid,  the  expanded 
parietal  eminences  again  standing  out. 

There  is  an  os  epiptericnni  on  both  sides.  The  pterion,  right  and  left,  is  H-shaped. 

Figures  5-9  in  PL  XCV  are  photographs  of  the  skull  in  the  following  views:  facial, 
left  lateral,  vertical,  occpital,  basilar.  Figures  10-12  in  PI.  XCVI  are  craniographic  draw- 
ings of  the  skull  in  the  following  views:  facial,  left  lateral,  vertical.^® 

In  Table  i the  essential  cranial  measurements  and  indices,  and  in  Table  2 the  essential 
facial  measurements  and  indices  are  given.” 

With  a length-breadth  ratio  of  71.07  the  skull  is  dolichocranic,  long-headed.  The 
height-length  ratio  of  69.10  is  chamaecranic,  low-headed.  The  height-breadth  ratio  of 
97.23  is  metriocranic,  moderately  broad-headed.  The  transverse  fronto-parietal  ratio  of 
76.68  is  eurymetopic,  typical  of  a broad  forehead.  The  gnathic  or  alveolar  index  of  97.87 
is  barely  orthognathous,  or  straight-faced,  i.  e.,  evidence  of  only  a slight  downward  and 
forw'ard  slant. 

With  an  upper  face  height— bizygomatic  breadth  ratio  of  49.03  the  face  is  eurj-enic, 
broad  and  low.  The  ratios  of  60.39,  upper  mid-face  breadth  to  upper  face-height,  and  of 
98.02,  maximum  cranial  breadth  to  bizygomatic  breadth,  are  conhrmator)"  of  a broad  face. 
The  height-breadth  ratio  of  the  nose  is  51.55,  chamaerrhinic,  characteristic  of  a wide  nose. 
The  height-breadth  ratio  of  the  orbit  is  75.58,  chamaeconchic,  pointing  to  a low  orbit.  The 
breadth-length  ratio  of  the  palate  is  89.88,  brachystaphylic,  indicative  of  a broad  palate. 

In  summary,  the  skull  is  long,  low,  and  broad  at  the  forehead;  the  face  is  broad,  low, 
flat,  and  only  slightly  projecting;  the  nose  and  palate  are  broad;  the  orbits  are  low.  The  long 
skull  and  the  broad  face  are  contrasting— disbarmonic-features. 

® Taken  in  the  Broadbent-Bolton  Roentgenographic  Cephalometer  of  the  Bolton  Fund  through 
the  courtesy  of  Dr.  B.  Holly  Broadbent. 

It  will  be  noted  that  in  Fig.  7 the  parietal  eminences  are  emphasized  to  a greater  extent  than 
in  Fig.  12.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  contour  in  Fig.  12  is  at  glabellar  level,  below  the  eminences. 

^^The  measurements  are  according  to  Martin  (14,  pp.  625-62)  and  Morant  (15,  pp.  196-200). 


256  CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 

Comparison  with  contemporary  and  with  geographically  related  cranial  material 

When  the  skull  was  being  worked  out  of  its  matrix  of  earth  and  protective  covering  of 
paraffin  wax  it  was  provisionally  decided  that  its  length-breadth  proportions— obviously 
dolichocranic— placed  it  with  the  Proto-Mediterranean  physical  type.  We  were  prepared 
for  this,  for  we  have  concluded  elsewhere  (10,  1 1 ) that  the  Proto-Mediterraneans  are  basic 
not  only  to  the  geographic  area  from  which  they  take  their  name,  but  also  throughout  the 
Middle  East  and  the  Indo-Iranian  Area. 

Accordingly  we  shall  compare  the  Chanhu-daro  skull  first  with  female  Proto-Mediter- 
ranean crania  from  Sialkot,  Mohenjo-daro,  Tepe  Hissar,  Anau,  Ur,  Kish,  Alishar,  and 
Hanai  Tepe.  Sialkot  is  stated  by  Sewell  and  Cuba  (21,  p.  56,  6,  p.  Ixviii)  to  be  “ more  or 
less  contemporaneous  with  the  Chalcolithic  Age  in  India.”  Mohenjo-daro  is  dated  at  ca. 
3250-2750  B.  c.  by  Marshall  (13,  pp.  103-4),  while  Stein  (23,  p.  184)  dates  it  during 
“ the  first  quarter  of  the  third  millennium  b.  c.”  Tepe  Hissar  is  divided  into  three  periods 
by  Schmidt,  as  follows:  Period  I,  before  4000  b.  c.  to  ca.  3500  b.  c.;  Period  II,  ca.  3500 
B.  c.  to  ca.  3000  B.  c.;  Period  III,  ca.  3000  b.  c.  to  ca.  2000  b.  c.  (?)  (see  10,  p.  227  and 
Table  VI).  Ur  is  dated  as  ca.  1900-1700  b.  c.  (10,  Table  VI).  Kish  “A”  dates  to  ca. 
2900-2800  B.  c.  (10,  Table  VI).  Alishar  Chalcolithic  is  dated  as  ca.  3500-3000  b.  c.,  and 
Alishar  Copper  Age  is  dated  as  ca.  3000-2500  b.  c.  (10,  Table  VI).  Hanai  Tepe  “ B ” dates 
to  ca.  2000  B.  c.  (10,  Table  VI).  The  chronological  range  covered  by  these  comparative 
data  is  approximately  500  years  earlier  and  later  than  the  accepted  age  of  the  Chanhu- 
daro  skull. 

In  Table  3 are  given  selected  cranio-facial  measurements  and  indices  of  the  several 
female  Mediterranean  skulls  from  the  foregoing  sites.'"  All  of  the  skulls,  including  Chanhu- 
daro,  are  dolichocranic  except  the  mesocranic  Alishar  Copper  Age  and  Anau.  With  respect 
to  skull  height  Chanhu-daro  is  chamaecranic,  Hissar  II  and  III  are  orthocranic,  while 
Sialkot,  Mohenjo-daro  and  Kish  “ A ” are  weakly  hypsicranic.  The  facial  breadth  is  euryen 
in  Chanhu-daro,  mesen  in  Alishar  Chalcolithic,  and  lepten  in  Hissar  II  and  III  and  Kish 
“ A.”  The  orbital  shape  is  chamaeconch  in  Chanhu-daro,  mesoconch  in  Hissar  II  and  III, 
Alishar  Copper  Age,  and  Anau,  and  hypsiconch  in  Mohenjo-daro,  Alishar  Chalcolithic,  and 
Kish  “ A.”  The  nasal  aperture  is  chamaerrhine  in  Chanhu-daro  and  Kish  “ A ” and 
mesorrhine  in  the  other  groups. 

If  we  summarize  the  general  Proto-Mediterranean  type  it  becomes  dolichocranic,  long- 
headed; orthocranic,  vault  of  moderate  height;  lepten,  narrow-faced;  mesoconchic,  orbit  of 
moderate  height;  mesorrhinic,  nasal  aperture  of  moderate  breadth.  In  comparison  the 
Chanhu-daro  skull  is  long-headed,  low  vaulted,  broad-faced,  and  has  a low  orbit  and  a broad 

For  Sialkot  see  Sewell  and  Guha,  22,  Table  2,  pp.  69-70  and  Guha,  6,  p.  Ixt'iii;  for  Mohenjo- 
daro  see  Sewell  and  Guha,  21,  pp.  645-6;  for  Tepe  Hissar  see  Krogman,  11,  Table  XXXVI;  for  Anau 
see  Sergi,  19,  p.  446;  for  Ur  see  Rappers,  8,  p.  108,  p.  112;  for  Kish  “ A”  see  Buxton,  i,  p.  no;  for 
Alishar  Chalcolithic  and  Alishar  Copper  Age  see  Krogman,  10,  Tables  IV-V;  for  Hanai  Tepe  “B” 
see  Kappers,  8,  p.  104.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  a- second  lot  of  cranial  material  from  Mohenjo-daro  is 
being  studied  by  Guha  and  Basu,  while  a series  from  Harappa  is  being  studied  by  Basu  (Guha,  6, 
p.  Ixviii). 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


257 


nasal  aperture.  In  only  one  character— the  length-hreadth  ratio  of  the  vault— does  the 
Chanhu-daro  skull  conform  with  the  ideal  Proto-Mediterranean  type. 

Long-headedness  is  not  confined  to  the  Proto-Mediterraneans,  nor,  indeed,  is  it  solely 
an  attribute  of  White  (Caucasic)  groups;  it  is  characteristic  of  the  great  majority  of  Negroid 
types.  The  presence  of  such  a type  in  early  Indian  history  is  quite  generally  accepted. 
Hutton  (7,  p.  27)  states  that  the  “ earliest  element  (in  India)  was  probably  Negroid.” 
Dixon  (2,  p.  243)  states  that  the  earliest  ethnic  type  in  India  was  a “ dolichocephalic, 
dark-skinned  Negroid  population.”  Sewell  and  Guha  (5,  pp.  194-5;  22,  p.  80)  state  that 
the  basic  races  of  India  show  a “ definite  Negrito  Type  in  Southern  India,  and  form  an 
undoubted  constituent  of  the  lower  stratum  of  the  Indian  population.”  In  the  Iron  Age  of 
India  Taylor  found,  in  cairns  at  Jewurgi,  crania  which  showed  Negroid  characteristics 
(6,  pp.  Ixxix-lxx).  Friederichs  and  Muller  conclude  that  a Hamitic  type  was  represented  at 
Mohenjo-daro,  especially  in  crania  Nos.  6,  7,  19  (3,  Table  III,  p.  392),  which  were 
classified  as  Mediterranean  by  Sewell  and  Guha.  The  Hamitic  type  was  defined  by 
Friederichs  and  Muller  as  long-headed,  with  moderate  to  high  vault,  with  moderate  to 
narrow  face,  and  with  high  orbit  and  moderate  to  narrow  nose.  These  characters,  very 
obviously,  do  not  depart  in  any  significant  detail  from  those  defined  for  the  Proto- 
Mediterraneans. 

At  Tepe  Hissar  (11,  Tables  XXFXXII)  there  were  eleven  male  crania  classified  as 
Negroid.  In  Table  4 these  are  compared  with  the  Chanhu-daro  skull.  There  is  an  expected 
sex  difference  in  the  obviously  greater  dimensions  of  the  male  crania.  The  Tepe  Hissar 
Negroids  are  dolichocranic,  long-headed;  chamaecranic,  low  vaulted;  mesen,  face  of  moder- 
ate breadth;  mesoconchic,  orbit  of  moderate  height;  chamaerihine,  broad-nosed.  The 
Chanhu-daro  skull  agrees  in  being  dolichocranic,  chamaecranic,  and  chamaerrhinic.  The 
length  and  height  proportions  of  the  vault  and  the  nasal  aperture  appear  to  fall  into  the 
Negroid  category,  as  exemplified  by  the  Hissar  material.  The  broad  face  is  still  unplaced. 

It  is  this  puzzling  facial  breadth— a broad,  flat  face  which  becomes  disharmonic  when 
it  is  compared  with  the  long,  low  skull— which  leads  to  a comparison  with  “ Mongoloid  ” 
or  Eastern  Asiatic  types.^®  In  Table  5 the  Chanhu-daro  skull  is  compared  with  female 
crania  from  Tepe  Hissar  (r  i.  Tables  XXIII-XXIV)  and  with  female  Naga  crania  measured 
by  Kitson  and  Morant  (9,  Table  IV,  p.  11)  and  female  Burmese  crania  measured  by 
Tildesley  (24,  Table  VIII,  p.  240).  The  Tepe  Hissar  crania  and  Burmese  A and  B are 
brachycranic,  round-headed;  the  Naga  and  Burmese  C are  mesocranic,  middle-headed.  The 
Tepe  Hissar  crania  are  orthocranic,  vault  of  moderate  height  ;all  the  others  are  hypsicranic, 
high-vaulted.  The  Tepe  Hissar  crania  are  euryen,  broad-faced;  all  the  others  are  mesen, 
face  of  moderate  breadth  (Burmese  B is  nearly  lepten,  narrow-faced).  All  crania  are 
mesoconchic,  orbit  of  moderate  height  (Burmese  B is  nearly  hypsiconch,  high  orbit).  The 
Tepe  Hissar  crania  and  the  Naga  and  Burmese  A are  chamaeahine,  broad-nosed;  Burmese 

We  shall  use  the  term  Eastern  Asiatic  in  preference  to  Mongoloid.  The  former  refers  to  the 
typical  Far  Eastern  hroad-faced  brachycephali,  while  the  latter  should  be  restricted  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Mongolia,  the  true  Mongols,  who  in  their  cranio-facial  dimensions  and  proportions  may  approximate 
certain  Caucasic  groups. 


258 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


B and  C are  mesorrhine,  nose  of  moderate  breadth  (though  both  are  nearly  chamaerrhine). 
The  Chanhu-daro  skull  verges  upon  these  Eastern  Asiatic  types  only  in  general  increase 
of  facial  breadth  and  in  the  marked  increase  in  nasal  breadth.  These  two  facial  features 
may,  in  this  instance,  be  linked,  i.  e.,  the  chamaerrhinity  may  be  a reflection  of  a general 
tendency  to  an  individual  facial  breadth  expansion,  possibly  during  early  facial  growth. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  Chanhu-daro  skull  in  its  cranial  and  facial  measurements, 
indices,  and  morphological  features  reflects  characteristics  which  in  their  entirety  may  be 
attributed  to  no  one  single  type.  Rather  does  there  seem  to  be  a blend,  a composite,  of 
diverse  ethnic  strains. 

Conclusions 

The  Chanhu-daro  skull  is  that  of  an  adult  female  approximately  twenty-two  to 
twenty-five  years  of  age.  It  was  placed  in  the  jar  in  which  it  was  found  some  time  after 
death. With  Mackay  (12,  p.  87)  we  conjecture  “ why  the  skull  only  was  thus  preserved 
and  not  the  other  bones.”  Was  this  the  skull  of  a royal  personage?  A priestess?  A sor- 
ceress? A captive  of  high  rank?  or  possibly  merely  the  possession  of  an  individual  who 
interred  it  in  a jar  in  whimsical  jest?  Does  the  presence  of  the  lone  skull  hint  at  ceremonial 
decapitation?  or  magical  rites  associated  with  the  head  (brain)  as  the  center  of  being? 
These  and  similar  questions  arise— they  cannot  be  answered.  The  presence  of  the  skull, 
without  lower  jaw,  without  vertebrae,  without  any  other  skeletal  parts,  is  the  one  objective 
fact.  Subjective  interpretations  have  no  place  here. 

When  we  come  to  the  problem  of  physical  type  we  are  almost  forced  into  the  realm 
of  the  subjective.  If  this  skull  had  been  assembled  from  odd  parts  it  could  not  present  a 
more  conflicting  picture.  It  is  Proto-Mediterranean  in  its  length,  in  its  moderate  inter- 
orhital  distance,  in  its  narrow  nasal  bones,  in  its  high  nasal  bridge,  in  its  short  semi-parabolic 
palate  and  small  teeth,  and  possibly  in  its  occipital  development.  It  is  Negroid  in  its  low 
flattened  vault,  in  its  broad  nose  with  its  “ troughing  ” or  slight  sulcus  prae-nasalis,  in  its 
diminished  suhnasal  height,  in  its  low  orbits,  and  possibly  in  its  length  and  occpital  fullness. 
It  appears  to  be  Eastern  Asiatic  in  its  broad,  flat  face,  in  its  broad  forehead,  and  possibly  in 
its  broad  nose. 

We  are  fortunate,  indeed,  that  the  skull  was  preserved  in  almost  perfect  condition. 
Had  it  been  fragmentary,  necessitating  a more  or  less  complete  restoration,  then  the  con- 
flicting features  might  be  traced  to  partial  or  faulty  reconstruction.  But  we  are  not  dealing 
with  missing  pieces,  with  fragments  of  doubtful  contact  margin,  or  with  regional  areas 
which  may  represent  different  rates  of  progressive  development.  The  Chanhu-daro  skull  is 
an  entity  presenting  in  undisturbed  relationship  the  several  apparently  contradictory 
features  already  outlined. 

The  basis  of  the  definition  of  characters  diagnostic  of  ethnic  types  is  a problem  to  be 
considered,  especially  with  reference  to  the  range  of  variation.  There  are  certain  cranial 

Petrie  traces  the  origin  of  the  Egyptian  shaxvahti-hgmes  to  “the  primitive  custom  of  dismember- 
ment,” when  “ the  shull  was  kept  apart  and  later  added  to  the  body.”  The  Chanhu-daro  skull  may 
reflect  this  “ primitive  custom  of  dismemberment.” 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


259 


and  facial  measurements  and  indices  that  overlap,  as,  for  example,  the  length-hreadth  ratio 
in  Proto-Mediterranean  and  Negroid.  There  are  also  certain  morphological  features  which 
overlap— the  filled-out  occiput  of  the  Proto-Mediterranean  and  the  bulging  occiput  of  the 
Negroid.  Again,  it  is  possible  that  general  increase  in  facial  breadth  may  result  in  an 
increased  breadth  in  component  parts.  If  this  be  true,  then  the  chamaerrhinity  at  hrst 
considered  Negroid  may  here  merely  accompany  a broadened  face  which  is  representative 
of  either  a possible  intermixture  “ with  an  Eastern  Asiatic  type  or  an  individual  cranio-facial 
pattern. 

The  early  history  of  the  Mediterranean  type  (the  Proto-Mediterranean)  is  somehow 
linked  with  the  emergence  of  the  Negroid  type.  Whether  it  is  traceable  to  common  origin 
or  early  intermixture  we  cannot  say.  The  faet  remains  that  in  Neolithic  Spain,  Portugal, 
Italy—  the  northern  fringe  of  African  influence— there  are  cranial  types  that  combine  in 
almost  equal  degree  Caucasic  and  Negroid  features.  With  time,  apparently,  the  latter 
features  were  bred  out  to  leave  a purely  Caucasic  Mediterranean  type. 

It  is  theoretically  possible,  assuming  Negroid  and  Caucasic  traits  to  be  components 
of  the  emerging  Mediterranean  type,  that  re-combinations  occur  at  a later  date  to  simulate 
an  earlier  form.  The  identification  of  a “ Hamitic  type  ” at  Mohenjo-daro  may  be  additional 
evidence  of  this  possibility. 

We  venture  to  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  Chanhu-daro  skill  represents  a Proto- 
Mediterranean  type  in  which  ancestral  Negroid  traits  have  manifested  themselves.  Such 
a view  would  explain  all  craniofacial  characters  except  the  disharmonic  face  breadth.  Does 
this  represent  mixture  with  an  Eastern  Asiatic  typer*  We  think  not,  preferring  to  regard  it 
as  an  individual  variation  quite  apart.  We  prefer  also  to  regard  the  broad  nose  as  somehow 
related  to  the  bizygomatic  expansion.  In  its  composite  character  the  Chanhu-daro  skull 
is  a most  instructive  instance  of  the  combination  of  basic  or  primitive  features  associated 
with  purely  individual  characters. 

Since  this  report  was  written  (1937)  Vallois  has  published  on  Sialk  and  Fiirst  on 
Shah  Tepe.  I have  considered  all  the  recent  relevant  material  in  a forthcoming  report  for 
the  Oriental  Institute  on  crania  from  Tell  al-Judaidah  and  Chatal  Hiiyiik.  Ever)'thing  tends 
to  confirm  the  ideas  herein  presented.  (W.  M.  K.,  Feb.  9,  1941). 

References 

JRAl  = Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute. 

OIP  = Oriental  Institute  Publications,  Chicago. 

1.  Buxton,  L.  H.  D.  and  Rice,  D.  T.  1931.  “Report  on  the  Human  Remains  Found  at  Kish” 

(with  Preface  by  S.  Langdon),  JRAl,  61:  57-119. 

2.  Dixon,  R.  B.  1923.  “ The  Racial  History  of  Man,”  Scribners,  New  York. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  explain  the  long-headedness  of  the  Chanhu-daro  skull  in  the  presence 
of  intermixture  with  a round-headed  type.  According  to  our  best  knowledge  brachycephaly  is  dominant 
in  a cross.  Nor  does  the  evidence  at  our  disposal  warrant  the  unquestioned  acceptance  of  chamaer- 
rhinity as  a concomitant  of  an  increased  bizygomatic  breadth.  Among  euryprosopic  tjpes  the  nasal 
index  varies  from  mesorrhine  to  chamaerrhine. 


260 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


3.  Friederichs,  H.  F.  and  Muller,  H.  W.  1933.  “Die  Rassenelemente  im  Indus-Tal  wahrend 

des  4 und  3 vorchristlichen  Jahrtausends  und  ihre  Verbreitung,”  Anthrofos.  28 : 383-406. 

4.  Hargreaves,  H.  1929.  Excavations  in  Baluchistan,  1925.  Samfur  Mound,  Mastung,  and 

Sohr  Damh,  Ndl.  (Mem.  Arch.  Surv.  Ind.  No.  35),  Calcutta. 

5.  Cuba,  B.  S.  1934.  “ Racial  affinities  of  the  people  of  India  ” (Abst.).  C.  R.  Congres  Internat. 

des  Sciences  Anthrof.  et  Ethnol.,  pp.  194-5.  London. 

6.  . 1935.  Census  of  India,  1931.  Vol.  I,  India.  Part  III,  Ethnogra-phical.  A.  Racial 

Affinities  of  the  Peoples  of  India,  pp.  i-lxxi  and  1-116.  Simla,  Govt.  India  Press. 

7.  Hutton,  J.  H.  1934.  “ Racial  and  cultural  history  of  India  ” (Afist.).  C.  R.  Congres  Internat. 

des  Sciences  Anthrop.  et  Ethnol.,  pp.  27-39.  London. 

8.  Kappers,  C.  U.  A.  1934.  The  Anthropology  of  the  Near  East  (with  Chapter  X by  L.  W. 

Parr).  Amsterdam. 

9.  Kitson,  E.  and  Morant,  G.  M.  1933.  “A  Study  of  the  Naga  Skull,”  Biometrika,  25:  1-20. 

10.  Krogman,  W.  M.  1938.  “Cranial  Types  from  Ali^ar  Hiiyuk  and  Their  Relations  to  Other 

Racial  Types,  Ancient  and  Modem  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia.  (In  “The  Alishar 
Hiiyiik,  Seasons  of  1930-32,”  Part  III,  OIP,  Vol.  XXX,  Chicago,  by  H.  H.  von  der  Osten, 
1938.) 

11.  Krogman,  W.  M.  1940.  “ Racial  Types  from  Tepe  Hissar,  Iran,  from  the  Late  Fifth  to  the 

Early  Second  Millennium,  b.  c.,  Verhand.  der  Konink  Nederl.  Akad.  Weten.  Tweedie 
Sectie,  Vol.  XXXIX,  No.  2,  pp.  1-87. 

12.  Mackay,  E.  1936.  “Excavations  at  Chanhu-daro  by  the  American  School  of  Indie  and 

Iranian  Studies  and  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston:  Season  1935-36,”  Bull.  Mus. 
Fine  Arts,  Boston.  34:  83-92. 

13.  Marshall,  Sir  J.  H.  (ed.).  1931.  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization,  Vols.  I-III, 

London. 

14.  Martin,  R.  1928.  Lehrhuch  der  Anthropologic,  Second  ed.  Vol.  II,  pp.  625-62,  Fischer, 

Jena. 

15.  Morant,  G.  M.  1922-23.  “ A First  Study  of  the  Tibetan  Skull,”  Biometrika,  14:  pp.  193-260. 

16.  . 1924.  “A  Study  of  Gertain  Oriental  Crania  Including  the  Nepalese  and  Tibetan 

Series  in  the  British  Museum  (Natural  History),”  Biometrika,  16:  pp.  1-105. 

17.  Petrie,  Sir.  F.  Shabtis.  Brit.  School  Archeol.  in  Egypt.  London  (see  Man  for  April,  1937, 

No.  84,  pp.  69-70). 

18.  Pumpelly,  R.  1908.  Explorations  in  Turkestan,  1904.  Prehistoric  Civilizations  of  Anau 

(2  vols.).  Carnegie  Inst,  of  Washington. 

19.  Sergi,  G.  1908.  “ Description  of  Some  Skulls  from  the  North  Kurgan,  Anau,”  Vol.  II,  pp. 

445-6  (in  Pumpelly,  op.  cit.f). 

20.  Schmidt,  E.  F.  1933.  “Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  Museum  Journal,  Univ.  Mus., 

23:  PP-  32.3-483- 

21.  Sewell,  R.  B,  S.  and  Guha,  B.  S.  1931.  “ Human  Remains  Eound  at  Mohenjo-daro,”  Vol.  II, 

pp.  599-648  (in  Marshall,  op.  cit.'). 

22.  Sewell,  R.  B.  S.  and  Guha,  B.  S.  1929.  “ Report  on  the  Bones  Excavated  at  Nal,”  Appendix  V, 

pp.  56-89  (in  Hargreaves,  op.  cit.'). 

23.  Stein,  Sir  A.  1934.  “The  Indo-Iranian  Borderlands:  their  Prehistory  in  the  Light  of 

Geography  and  Recent  Explorations,”  JRAI,  64:  pp.  179-202. 

24.  Tildesley,  M.  L.  1920-21.  “ A First  Study  of  the  Burmese  Skull,”  Biowetrifen,  13:  pp.  176-262. 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


TABLE  I 

Cranial  Measurements  and  Indices  of  the  Chanhu-daro  Skull 

Maximum  length  (1) 178.0  mm. 

Minimum  breadth  (b) . 126.5 

Minimum  forehead  breadth  (b') 97.0 

Basio-bregmatic  height  (h')  1^3 -o 

Auriculo-vertical  height  (oh) 108.0 

Basi-nasal  length  Qb)  94.0 

Basi-prosthion  length  (gl)  92.0 

Transverse  arc  (q') 2.79.0 

Sagittal  arc  (s) 353-o 

Nasion-bregma  arc  (si) 126.0 

Bregma-lambda  arc  (S2) 116.0 

Lambda-opisthion  arc  (S3)  ...  1 1 1 .0 

Horizontal  circumference  (u) 492.0 

Bi-asterionic  breadth  . . 98.0 

Cranial  index  (b  X loo/l)  . . 7^-°7 

Height-length  index  (h'  X loo/l)  . . . 69.10 

Height-breadth  index  (h^  X loo/b) 97-23 

Transverse  fronto-parietal  index  (b'  X loo/b)  76.68 

Gnathic  index  (gl.  X 100/lb) 97-87 

TABLE  2 

Facial  Measurements  and  Indices  of  the  Chanhu-daro  Skull 

Total  face  height,  na-gn  (gh)  

Upper  face  height,  na-pros  (gfh) 61.0  mm. 

Mid-face  breadth  (gb)  loi.o 

Bi-zygomatic  breadth  (j)  124.0 

Nasal  height  (nhl)  48.5 

Nasal  breadth  (nb) 25.0 

Interorbital  width  (dc) 

Orbital  breadth  (oi  1) ’ 

Orbital  breadth  (0/ 1)  43.0 

Orbital  height  (02 1)  32.5 

Palatal  length  (gP)  44.5 

Palatal  breadth  (g2)  . 39.0 

Foramen  magnum  length  (f  m 1)  37.0 

Foramen  magnum  breadth  (f  m b) 30.0 

Total  facial  index  (gh  X loo/j)  

Upper  facial  index  (gfh  X loo/j)  . 49-o3 

Total  mid-facial  index  (gh  X loo/gb)  

Upper  mid-facial  index  (g'h  Xioo/gb) 60.39 

Nasal  index  (nb  X loo/nhl)  5i-55 

Orbital  index  (02 1 X 100/0/ 1) 75-58 

Palatial  index  (gs  X loo/gP)  ....  89.88 

Foraminal  index  (fmb  X loo/fml)  . ...  81.18 

Transverse  cranio-facial  index  (j  X loo/b)  98.02 


fO 

U 

■-I 

P3 

< 

H 


•-H  ^ 


e 

e 


o\oo 


moo  vo 

ro  r? 

m 6 ^ T* 

CO  ^ 


j>. 


C\ 

00 

tT* 

r^ 

ri 

a\ 

oq 

a\ 

ro 

C\ 

q\ 

U-vCO 

rq 

06 

'-0  n 

6 

lA 

ON 

4 

6 

00 

rO 

6 

0 

o\ 

lo 

rO 

rooo 

<s 

liO 

(U 

Cu, 

(U 

H 


o\ 

T}-\0 

0 VO 

0 

1^00 

w 

rO 

Ov 

N 

•-;  00 

l-H  CO 

ITN 

<s 

VO  ro 

r> 

rx 

rq 

r< 

06 

N d\ 

ri 

4 

■0 

ci  vD 

06 

6 

On 

06 

ro 

6\ 

rO  r^ 

HH  t-H 

SO 

ON  ir\ 

rO 

rq 

r^ 

T|- 

q q 
/~\  lA 
r\  rO 


ir\ 

oq 

^i- 


C3 


O 

CX.  o 
p^  op 
o < 

,u 


0 

q 

0 

: q 

0 

• 0 
q oq 

2^ 

ro 

r\ 

rO 

ro 

ro 

coco 

I-* 

l-H 

S:i  - 

'T2  •-* 

o 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

VO 

; 0 

q 

N 

q 

q 

w 

0 0 

00 

6 

• ro 

06 

lA 

f4 

vd  N 

rO 

• VO 

r) 

ir\ 

ro 

rO 

ON 

rr  <s 

o o 


2 CL,„  ^ 

g <u  ca  i-c  osoo 


o 

lr\ 


3 

q 

q 

0 

• r^ 

cd 

lA 

4 

vd 

4i 

00 

< 

v^ 

)-( 

ro 

q q ro 
\0  6 ro 
ro  rOOO 


loi  O 

LTN 

^ U-  J 
CO  ro 


irs 

(S 


</5 


a\ 


2^ 

0 

q 

0 ’*rvo 

• 0 

0 

ro 

0 

vd 

N 0*  6 

: N 

d 

. 'O 

rf  4 

r\ 

<s 

rvoo 

. 'O 

irv 

rO 

ro  Os 

q\  o 

ro 


J o 
.'2 


O 00 
•-> 

w 

I\ 


c 

<u 

o 

s 


0 

VO 

t'v 

rO 

0 

ir\  vO 

. . 0 

ITN 

Tf  rJ 

rO 

ro 

rq 

0 

T^\q 

q 

On  0\ 

‘ 0 

iM 

rC 

<s 

6 

06 

vd 

ro  lA 

• 

06 

ri  t\ 

vd 

<:d 

no 

V5 

0 

ON 

Vw/ 

00 

- 

rovo  r\ 

• • ON  • 

rO 

rooo 

<S 

3 

-C 

C 

n3 

6 


t\  o 


2~N 

0 

iTN 

q 

0 - 

q 

q 

0 

iH 

06 

\d 

rd 

4 ds 

4 

cd 

no 

V^ 

r\ 

r< 

(S 

two 

• VO 

r^ 

So"§ 
c S 

(U  ^ 
43 

e E 

3 3 

E E 

X X 
cd  cd 


*c3 

: 43 


C3 

E ^ 

CJD  C 

qj  •-- 


X 

<D 

■ c 

X 43 

^ So 

G 


p3  o i; 


43  OO 

.2P’S 

1>  43 
43 


ro 

q 

ON 


^ X <i> 

S .3^  "2 

w 4 C 
43  G 


« • 


4G 

oo 


^ O 

o 

HD 


00 

O lr\  ir\ 
ro  c4  lA 
ro 


C3 

E 

a 

rT'  C4 

N o 

’.4  o ^ 

P3  H D 


"T3  43  X 
c3  00  QJ 

C>  •>"H 

>4  Cl>  ^ 

43  .5 


43  43  43 

Ut  V-i  ixt 

ooo 


00  lr\ 
^ r< 


'Si'i 

•a  E 

rJ3 


CQ  Cd  C3  I 


C3  CQ 
«/5  </> 

C«  OS 

22 


262 


Nasal  index  5* -55  48.04  ....  61.61 


SKULL  FOUND  AT  CHANHU-DARO 


263 


TABLE  4 


Negroid  Males  at  Tepe  Hissar  Compared  with  the 

Chanhu-daro 

(0 

Female  Chanhu-daro  Skull 

Hissar  III 

(2) 

Maximum  length  

1 78.0 

188.64 

Maximum  breadth 

126.5 

131.45 

Basio-bregmatic  height 

■ ■ 12.3.0 

129.90 

Cranial  index 

71.07 

69.66 

Height-length  index 

69.10 

69.41 

Total  face  height 

112.30 

Upper  face  height 

. ...  61.0 

68.36 

Bi-zygomatic  breadth 

124.0 

125.30 

Total  facial  index  

89.57 

Upper  facial  index 

49.03 

54-34 

Orbital  breadth  . . . 

43.0 

40.46 

Orbital  height 

• ■ ■ ■ 32.-5 

31.18 

Orbital  index 

75-58 

77.09 

Nasal  height 

. . . 48.5 

49.27 

Nasal  breadth  

25.0 

27.30 

Nasal  index 

51.55 

55-47 

TABLE  5 

The  Chanhu-dabo  Skull  Compaked  with  Female  Crania  from  Tepe  Hissar  and  with  Modern 

Female  Naga  and  Burmese  Types 


Chanhu- 

daro 

Tepe 

Hissar 

Naga 

A 

Burmese 

B 

c 

(0 

(2) 

00 

Cn) 

00 

C17) 

00 

Maximum  length 

178.0 

I7I.O 

1 73- 1 

166.5 

163.80 

170.2 

Maximum  breadth  

126.5 

137-5 

132.9 

138.0 

135-6 

130.6 

Basio-bregmatic  height  . . . 

123.0 

125.0 

127.6 

130-4 

130.8 

129.4 

Cranial  index  

71.07 

80.45 

76.70 

83.10 

82.90 

76.90 

Height-length  index 

69.10 

73-19 

76.60 

78.30 

bo 

0 

76.00 

Total  face  height  

Upper  face  height  . ... 

61.0 

107.5 

68.0 

63-9 

66.0 

66.1 

63-9 

Bi-zygomatic  breadth  . . 

124.0 

130.0 

125. 1 

126.7 

121.9 

1 18.7 

Total  facial  index 

Upper  facial  index  

49-03 

82.70 

52-33 

51.10 

52.10 

54.20 

53.80 

Orbital  breadth 

43-0 

43-0 

41.5 

41.8 

41.5 

42.2 

Orbital  height 

32-5 

34-0 

32-4 

34-6 

34-6 

33-2 

Orbital  index 

- - - - 75-58 

79-03 

78.50 

82.80 

83.00 

78.8 

Nasal  height  

48-5 

49-5 

48.4 

50.6 

49-4 

47-3 

Nasal  breadth  . .... 

....  25.0 

25.5 

25-7 

26.8 

25.0 

24.0 

Nasal  index 

51-55 

52.80 

54.20 

52-70 

50.70 

50.50 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abbott,  J.,  The  Keys  of  Power,  London  and  New  York,  1932. 

Albright,  W.  F.,  “A  Set  of  Egyptian  Playing  Pieces  and  Dice  from  Palestine,”  Mizraim,  Vol.  I,  1933. 
New  York,  London. 

Allen,  J.,  “ Ancient  Indian  Coins,”  Catalogue  British  Museum,  ips6. 

Ancient  Egy-pt  and  the  East,  1933-35. 

Andrae,  A.  W.,  Die  Archaischen  Ischtar-T emple  in  Assur,  Leipzig  Berlin,  1922. 

Andrews,  F.  H.,  " Neolithic  Pottery  in  Sistan,”  Burlington  Magazine,  1925. 

Annual  Bibliography  of  Indian  Archaeology  for  1932,  Leyden,  1934. 

Anthropos,  1933,  Vienna. 

Antiquaries  Journal,  Society  of  Antiquaries,  London.  Vols.  II,  VIII,  X,  XII,  XIII. 

Antiquity,  Vols.  I,  IX,  X.  Gloucester. 

Archaeologia,  published  by  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  London.  Vol.  LXXIX. 

Arkell,  A.  J.,  ” Cambay  and  the  Bead  Trade,”  Antiquity,  Vol.  X. 

Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  1926-1929. 

Beck,  H.,  “ Notes  on  Glazed  Stones  (Glazed  Steatite),”  Ancient  Egypt  and  the  East,  1934. 

Biometrika,  1920-24,  1933.  Cambridge,  England. 

Bosanquet  and  Dawkins,  " Palaikastro  Excavations,”  Journal  British  School,  Athens:  Suppl.  Paper, 
No.  I. 

Brunton,  G.,  Mostagedda.  London,  1937. 

Brunton,  G.,  and  G.  Caton-Thompson,  The  Badarian  Civilization,  London,  1928. 

Burlington  Magazine,  London,  1925. 

Buxton,  L.  FI.  D.,  " Report  on  the  Human  Remains  at  Kish,”  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute, 

^931- 

Catalogue,  Devizes  Museum,  Devizes,  Eng. 

Caton-Thompson,  G.  and  G.  Brunton,  The  Badarian  Civilization,  London,  1928. 

Childe,  V.  G.,  Ancient  Egypt  and  the  East,  London,  1933. 

, The  Aryans,  New  York,  London,  1926. 

, Danube  in  Prehistory,  O.xford,  1929. 

, New  Light  on  the  Most  Ancient  East,  New  York,  London,  1934. 

Contenau,  G.  and  G.  Ghirshman,  Fouilles  du  Tepe  Giyan,  Paris,  1935. 

Cowell,  E.  B.,  The  Vataka  or  stories  of  the  Buddha’s  former  births  (Mittavinda-Vataka). 

Crooke,  W.,  Religion  and  Folk-lore  of  Northern  India,  London,  1896. 

Delaporte,  L.,  Catalogue  des  Cylindres  Orientaux,  Mus6e  du  Louvre,  Paris. 

Dixon,  R.  B.,  The  Racial  History  of  Man,  New  York,  London,  1923. 

Dumont,  P.  E.,  Journal  American  Oriental  Society,  Vol.  53. 

Durai,  H.  G.,  Man,  1929. 

Ebert,  M.,  Reallexikon  der  V orgeschichte.  Berlin,  1924-1932. 

Evans,  Sir  A.,  Palace  of  Minos.  London,  1921-35. 

"Evil  Eye  Brands,”  Illustrated  Weekly  of  India,  April,  1931. 

Fleure,  H.,  and  H.  Peake,  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  1930. 

Frankfort,  H.,  in  Illustrated  London  News,  1932. 

, Oriental  Institute  Communications,  Chicago,  Nos.  16,  19,  20. 

, “The  Indus  Civilization  and  the  Near  East,”  Annual  Bibliography  of  Indian  Archaeology, 

1932.  Leyden,  1934. 

Friederichs,  H.  F.,  Der  Alte  Orient,  1933. 

, and  H.  W.  Muller,  " Die  Rassenelemente  in  Indus-Tal  wahrend  des  4 und  3 vorchristlichen 

Jahrtausends  und  ihre  Verbreitung,”  Anthropos,  1933.  Wien. 

Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro  (F.  E.  M.),  by  E.  J.  H.  Mackay,  Government  of  India  Press, 
New  Delhi,  1938. 


265 


266 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Gadd,  C.  J.,  “ Seals  of  Ancient  Indian  Style  found  at  Ur,”  Proceedings  of  the  British  Academy, 
Vol.  XVIII. 

Ghirshman,  R.,  Fouilles  de  Sialk,  Musee  du  Louvre,  Vol.  I,  1938. 

Guha,  B.  S.,  Census  of  India,  1931.  Vol.  I,  India.  Part  III,  Ethnographical.  A.  Racial  Affinities  of 
the  Peoples  of  India.  Government  of  India  Press,  Simla,  1935. 

Guha,  B.  S.,  Racial  Affinities  of  the  People  of  India  (Abst.),  C.  R.  Congres  Internat.  des  Sciences 
Anthrop.  et  Ethnol.,  1934. 

Guide  to  the  Antiquities  of  the  Bronze  Age,  British  Museum,  1920. 

Hall,  H.  R.,  A Seasons  Work  at  Ur,  London,  1930. 

, Babylonian  and  Assyrian  Sculpture  in  the  British  Museum,  Paris  and  Brussels,  1928. 

, Bronze  Age  of  Greece,  New  York,  1927;  London,  1928. 

, and  C.  L.  Woolley,  Ur  Excavations,  Vol.  1.  London  and  Philadelphia,  1928. 

Hamilton,  R.  W.,  ” Excavations  at  Tell  Abu  Hawam,”  Quarterly  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities  in 
Palestine,  Vol.  IV,  1934. 

Hargreaves,  H.,  “ Excavations  in  Baluchistan  ^Memoir  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  No.  35X 
1929. 

Harrison,  H.  S.,  Pots  and  Pans  (The  Beginning  of  Things  Series).  London,  1928. 

Hawes,  H.  B.,  Gournia.  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania  Museum  Trans.,  Vol.  i,  1904. 

Heine-Geldem,  R.,  “ Archaeological  Traces  of  the  Vedic  Aryans,”  Journal  of  the  Indian  Society  of 
Oriental  Art,  Vol.  IV,  1936. 

Hemmy,  A.  S.,  “ Statistical  Treatment  of  Ancient  Weights,”  Ancient  Egypt  and  the  East,  1935. 
Herzfeld,  E.,  Die  Ausgrabungen  von  Samarra,  V.,  1930. 

Herzfeld,  E.,  in  Illustrated  London  News,  1929. 

Hilzheimer,  M.,  “ The  Evolution  of  the  Domestic  Horse,”  Antiquity,  Vol.  IX. 

Hopkins,  E.  W.,  The  Religions  of  India,  Boston,  1895. 

Hrozny,  B.,  O NejstarTim  Stehovdm  Ndrodu  A O Problemu  Civilisace  Proto-lndicke,  Prague,  1939. 
Hume,  R.  E.,  The  Thirteen  Principal  Upanishads. 

Hutton,  J.  H.,  Racial  and  Cultural  History  of  India  (Abst.),  C.  R.  Congres  Internat.  des  Sciences 
Anthrop.  et  Ethnol.,  1934. 

Illustrated  London  News,  1929,  1931,  1932,  1939. 

Illustrated  Weekly  of  India,  1931.  Bombay. 

Iraq,  Vols.  Ill,  VII.  London. 

Jordan,  J.,  Abhandlungen  der  Preussischen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.  Phil.-Hist.  Klasse  (Ams- 
grabungen  in  Uruk-Warka'),  1929. 

Journal  American  Oriental  Society,  Vols.  53,  57. 

Journal  British  School  at  Athens:  Suppl.  Paper  No.  i. 

Journal  of  Egyptian  Archaeology,  1928.  London. 

Journal  of  the  Indian  Society  of  Oriental  Art,  Vol.  IV,  1936. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  1930,  1931,  1934. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1930,  1933. 

Kappers,  C.  U.  A.,  The  Anthropology  of  the  Near  East  (with  Chapter  by  L.  W.  Parr),  Amsterdam, 
1934- 

Kitson,  E.,  and  G.  M.  Morant,  “ A Study  of  the  Naga  Skull,”  Biometrika,  1933. 

Koldewey,  R.,  Excavations  at  Babylon,  1914. 

Krogman,  W.  M.,  Cranial  Types  from  Alisar  Hilyuk,  and  their  Relations  to  Other  Racial  Types, 
Ancient  and  Modern  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia,  in  The  Alishar  Huytik,  Seasons  1930-32 
(^Oriental  Institute  Publications.  Chicago,  Vol.  XXX),  1938. 

Langdon,  S.,  Oxford  Editions  of  Cuneiform  Texts,  Vol.  VII. 

Legrain,  L.,  Culture  of  the  Babylonians,  Philadelphia,  1925. 

, Ur  Excavations,  Vol.  III. 

Liverpool  Annals  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology,  Vol.  VIII. 

Lucas,  A.,  Ancient  Egyptian  Materials.  London,  1934. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


267 


Mackay,  E.,  Anthropology  Memoirs,  Field  Museum,  Chicago,  Vol.  I. 

, “ Bead  Making  in  Ancient  Sind,”  Journal  American  Oriental  Society,  Vol.  57. 

, “ Decorated  Carnelian  Beads,”  Man,  Vol.  XXXIII. 

, “ Excavations  at  Chanhu-daro  by  the  American  School  of  Indie  and  Iranian  Studies  and  the 

Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston:  Season  1935-36,”  Bulletin  of  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston, 
November,  1936. 

, Further  Excavations  at  Mohenjo-daro  (F.  E.  M.),  Government  of  India  Press,  New  Delhi, 

1938. 

, ‘‘  Painted  Pottery  in  Modem  Sind,”  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  1930. 

Majumdar,  N.  G.,  “ Explorations  in  Sind  ” QMemoir  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  No.  48),  1934. 
Mailowan,  M.  E.  L.,  “ Excavations  at  Tall  Chagar  Bazar,”  Iraq,  Vol.  III. 

, M.  E.  L.,  in  Illustrated  London  News,  1939. 

Mailowan,  M.  E.  L.,  and  J.  Cmikshank  Rose,  Prehistoric  Assyria,  1935. 

Man,  1925,  1929,  1933,  1939. 

Marshall,  Sir  J.  (edited  by).  Mohenjo-daro  and  the  Indus  Civilization  (M.  I.  C.),  1931.  London. 
Martin,  R.,  Lehrhuch  der  Anthropologic  (2nd  Edit.),  Vol.  II,  1928.  Jena. 

Memoires  de  la  Mission  Archeologique  en  Perse,  Vols.  I,  VIII,  XIII,  XX. 

Memoirs  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  Nos.  35,  37,  43,  48. 

Mizraim,  New  York,  Vol.  I,  1933. 

Moore,  Carthage  of  the  Phoenicians.  London,  1905. 

Morant,  G.  M.,  “ A First  Study  of  the  Tibetan  Skull,”  Biometrika,  1922-23. 

Morant,  G.  M.,  “A  Study  of  certain  Oriental  Crania  including  the  Nepalese  and  Tibetan  Series  in 
the  British  Museum  (Natural  History),”  Biometrika,  1924. 

Morgan,  J.  de.  La  Prehistoire  Orientale.  Paris,  1925-1927. 

Museum  Journal,  University  Museum,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  1933,  1937. 

Myres,  J.  L.,  “ The  Stmeture  and  Origin  of  the  Minoan  Body-shield.”  Man,  1939. 

Noetling,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologic,  1898. 

Oppenheim,  Baron  Max  von.  Tell  Flalaf.  Leipzig,  1931;  London  and  New  York,  1933. 

Oppert,  G.,  On  the  Original  Inhabitants  of  Bharatavarsa  or  India,  1893.  Madras,  1889. 

Oriental  Institute  Communications,  Chicago.  Nos.  16,  19,  20. 

Peet,  T.  E.,  Stone  and  Bronze  Ages  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  Oxford,  1909. 

Petrie,  Sir  F.,  Ancient  Gaza,  IV.  London,  1931-34. 

, Buttons  and  Design  Scarabs.  London,  1925. 

, Decorative  Patterns  of  the  Ancient  World,  London,  1930. 

, Egyptian  Decorative  Art,  London,  1895. 

, lllahun,  Kahun  and  Curob,  London,  1891. 

, The  Making  of  Egypt,  London  and  New  York,  1939- 

, Shabtis,  London,  1935. 

, and  J.  E.  Quibell,  Nagada  and  Balias,  London,  1896. 

Preusser,  C.,  Tell  Asmar  and  Khafaje,  Oriental  Institute  of  Chicago,  Chicago,  1932. 

Pumpelly,  R.,  Explorations  in  Turkestan,  1904:  Prehistoric  Civilizations  of  Anau,  Carnegie  Institute 
of  Washington,  1908. 

Quarterly  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities  in  Palestine,  Vol.  IV. 

Quibell,  J.  E.,  and  F.  W.  Green,  Flierakonpolis,  London,  1900-1902. 

RostovtzefF,  M.,  History  of  the  Ancient  World,  Oxford,  1926-7. 

Schliemann,  H.,  llios.  New  York,  1881. 

, Troja,  Waren,  Gwandt,  1875. 

— , Troy  and  Its  Remains,  London,  1875. 

Schmidt,  E.  F.,  “Tepe  Hissar  Excavations,  1931,”  The  Museum  Journal,  University  Museum, 
Philadelphia,  Vol.  XXIII,  i933- 

Sewell,  R.  B.  S.,  and  B.  S.  Guha,  “ Human  Remains  found  at  Mohenjo-daro,”  Mohenjo-daro  and  the 
Indus  Civilization,  1931. 


268 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


, , “ Report  on  the  Bones  excavated  at  Nal,”  in  Memoir  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of 

India,  No.  35,  1929. 

Sergi,  G.,  “ Description  of  some  Skulls  from  the  North  Kurgan,  Anau,”  in  Exflorations  in  Turkestan, 
Vol.  II,  1908. 

Smith,  S.,  Alalakh  and  Chronology,  1940. 

Speiser,  E.  A.,  Excavations  at  Tepe  Gawra,  Vol.  I.  American  Schools  of  Oriental  Research,  Phila- 
delphia, 1935. 

, “ The  Pottery  of  Tell  Billa,”  The  Museum  Journal,  University  Museum,  Philadelphia,  Vol. 

XXIII,  1933- 

Stein,  Sir  A.,  Archaeological  Reconnaissances  in  North-Western  India  and  South-Eastern  Iran,  New 
York,  1937. 

, An  Archaeological  Tour  in  Gedrosia  QMemoir  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  No.  43),  1931. 

, An  Archaeological  Tour  in  Waziristdn  and  Northern  Baluchistan  (^Memoir  Archaeological 

Survey  of  India,  No.  37),  1929. 

, “ The  Indo-Iranian  Borderlands ; their  Prehistory  in  the  Light  of  Geography  and  Recent 

Explorations,”  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  1934. 

, in  Iraq,  Vol.  III. 

Streeter,  E.  W.,  Precious  Stones  and  Gems,  London,  1877. 

Swindler,  M.  H.,  Ancient  Painting,  New  Haven  and  London,  1929. 

Thompson,  G.,  Archaeologia,  Vol.  LXXIX. 

, and  M.  Mallowan,  Illustrated  London  News,  1931. 

Tildesley,  M.  L.,  “A  First  Study  of  the  Burmese  Skull,”  Biometrika,  1920-21. 

Ur  Excavations,  Vols.  I,  II,  III,  V.  London  and  Philadelphia,  1927,  1934,  1936,  1939. 

Ward,  W.  H.,  The  Seal  Cylinders  of  Western  Asia,  Washington,  1910. 

Watelin,  L.  Gh.,  Excavations  at  Kish,  IV. 

Woodward,  F.  L.,  The  Book  of  Gradual  Sayings  (Anguttara-Nikaya). 

Woolley,  Sir  L.,  Antiquaries  Journal,  Vol.  Xll. 

, The  Development  of  Sumerian  Art,  London,  1935. 

, Royal  Cemetery,  Ur  Excavations,  Vol.  II,  London  and  Philadelphia,  1934. 

, The  Ziggurat  and  its  Surroundings,  Ur  Excavations,  Vol.  V. 

Zervos,  C.,  L'Art  Mesopotamie,  Paris,  1935. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 

[Plates:  Frontispieces:  XXIII-XCVI] 

All  measurements  are  in  inches  and  decimals  of  inches. 

Abbreviations:  A.  = America  (where  objects  so  marked  were  sent). 


Ag.  Agate 
Ameth.  Amethyst 
Bar.  Barrel-shaped 
Bf.  Buff 
Bl.  Black 
Blu.  Blue 

Br.  Brown  or  Bronze 
Brec.  Breccia 
Car.  Camelian 
Ch.  Chert 
Chal.  Chalcedony 
Cop.  Copper 
Cr.  Cream-coloured 
Cry.  Crystal 
Cyl.  Cylindrical 
Dec.  Decoration 
Di.  Diameter 
Dp.  Deep 
Dr.  Drab 


Drk.  Dark 
Fai.  Faience 
Gl.  Glaze 
Gr.  Grey 
Gre.  Green 
Hi.  High 

Hnd.  mde.  Hand-made 

Hor.  Hornblende 

Iv.  Ivory 

Jas.  Jasper 

Lap.-laz.  Lapis-lazuli 

Lev.  Level 

Lg.  Long 

Lim.  Limestone 

Loc.  Locus 

Lt.  Light  (of  hue) 

Mar.  Marble 

Pas.  Paste 

Perl.  Perforated 


Pla.  Plasma 
Pnk.  Pink 
Pot.  Pottery 
Pt.  Paint 
Purp.  Purple 
Rd.  Red 
San.  Sandstone 
Sect.  Section 
Sh.  Shell 
Sip.  Slip 
Sq.  Square 
St.  Stone 
Steat.  Steatite 
Th.  Thick 
Unfin.  Unfinished 
Vitr.  Vitreous  paste 
Wde.  Wide 
Wh.  White 
Yell.  Yellow 


Frontis-piece  Ca').  Painted  Jar  (^Harappa  Culture').  Chapter 'VI.  (No.  503).  21.2  hi.  Trench  6(3), 
lev.  — 6.5  ft. 

Frontispiece  (h).  Painted  Pottery  Qhukar  Culture).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  4731).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.23  lg.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev. 

-|-  0.8  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  5164).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.5  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev. 

— 1 .4  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  4746).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  2.62  lg.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev 

-f  1.3  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  21 1 1).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91.  lev.  13.5  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  2086).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.75  lg.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  + 15.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2086).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  15.0  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  2015).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  13.3  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  21 1 1).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  + 13.5  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  1849).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.42  lg.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev. -b  17.5  ft.  A 

(10).  (No.  1754).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Rd.  & Br.  pts.  3.62  lg.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. 

4-  20.7  ft.  A 

Plate  XXIII.  Painted  Pottery  (Harappa  Culture).  Chapter  VI. 

(1) .  (No.  5373).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev. — 9.4  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  3702).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.5  hi.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  43,  lev.  — 5.9  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  4935).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  20,  lev.  13.5  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  5393/.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  7.7  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — ii.oft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  3754).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.28  lg.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  66,  lev. — 6.6  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3011,  A).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev. -|- 9-6  ft.  A 

269 


1JO 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Plate  XXIV.  Storage  Jars  (Hara-pfa  Culture).  Cha-pter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  3323).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  296,  lev.  + 7.2  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  3209).  Incised  pan.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  9/B,  loc.  442,  lev.  + 6.7  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3489).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  -f-  9-i  ft- 

(4) .  (No.  3324,  A).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  324,  lev.  9.2  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  3047).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 8.7  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3491).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev. -j- 8.6  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  3321).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  159,  lev.  + 8.8  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  3153,  A).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  no,  lev. 8.7  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  3490).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  +9.1  ft. 

Plate  XXy.  Pottery  Vessels  (Harappd  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  4411).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  271,  lev. 7.2  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3958).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  423,  lev. 

+ 7-7  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  2815).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  -j-  10.4  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  5330).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev. 

— 3-7  ft- 

C5)-  (No.  1558).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  J(i),  lev. — 3-4  ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  2913).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  158,  lev. 9-6  ft. 

(7) -  (No.  718).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — 5.4  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  431).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 2.0  ft.  A 

(9) -  (No.  5332).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  420,  lev. — 4.6  ft. 

(10).  (No.  813).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 1.6  ft.  A 
(n).  (No.  764).  Incised  base  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Trench  B( 5),  lev. 

— 6.6  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  1241).  Base  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev. 

— 7.5  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  4187).  Bowl  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 9.2  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  4920).  Bowl  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  iii,  lev. 

+ 7-S  It. 

(15) .  (No.  811).  Stem  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — i.oft. 

(16) .  (No.  3789).  Incised  stem  of  food-stand.  Gr.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  Trench  A(4),  lev.  — 7.8  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  5439).  Incised  stem  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 

— 22.0  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2506).  Bowl  of  food-stand.  Gr.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  144,  lev.  11.4  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  4787).  Stem  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 

-j-  1.7  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  3704).  Food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — 1.7  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  470).  Stem  and  base,  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  C(3),  lev. — 5.8  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  4928).  Base  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  32,  lev.  12.7  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  1811).  Food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Trench  A(4),  loc. — 4-9  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  3747).  Food-stand.  Dr.  pas.  Hnd-mde.  Trench  6(5),  lev.  — 1.8  ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  2246).  Food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  A(4),  lev. — 3-5  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  5069).  Bowl  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  21,  lev. 

+ 14-3  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  4197).  Stem  and  base  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev. 

+ 8.8  ft.  A 

(28) .  (No.  3272).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  237,  lev.  + i i.oft. 

(29) .  (No.  4854).  Food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev. — 4.0  ft.  A 

(30) .  (No.  3843).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd-mde.  Sq.  ?,  loc.  ?,  lev.  + 3.2  ft.  A 

(31) .  (No.  5113).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev. 

+ 13-3  ft- 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


271 


(32) .  (No.  3375).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev.  + 11.5  ft. 

(33) -  (No.  5163).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — i.oft. 

(34) .  (No.  2913).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  9-6  ft.  A 

(35) .  (No.  3370).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev.  11.5  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  2913).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  +9-6  ft.  A 

(37) .  (No.  5446).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 18.6  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  5436).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. — 20.5  ft. 

(39) .  (No.  5191).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev. — 12.3  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  5192).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 6.7  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  5444).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. — 22.0  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  1469).  Frag.  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4.6  ft.  A 

(43) .  (No.  5011).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  -j-  7-2.  ft. 

(44) .  (No.  4944).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  -T  ft. 

(45) .  (No.  3758).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 6.6  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  4976).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  298,  lev.  8.0  ft.  A 

(47) .  (No.  4087).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  Sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  -f  9.1  ft. 

(48) .  (No.  2966).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  339,  lev.  + 7.0  ft.  A 

(49) .  (No.  4877).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd-mde.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  436,  lev.  + 9-2  ft.  A 

(50) .  (No.  5384).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 19.0  ft. 

(51/.  (No.  4682).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(52) .  (No.  4509).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  240,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(53) .  (No.  4362).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  + 8.3  ft.  A 

(54) .  (No.  203).  Handled  cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  C(2),  lev, — 5.0  ft.  A 

(55) .  (No.  670).  Handled  cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  l(i),  loc.  61,  lev.  — 6.5  ft. 

(56) .  (No.  4351).  Feeding-cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Br.  sips.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  31 1,  lev.  + 7-2 ft. 

(57) .  (No.  4503).  Incised  bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  3.8  ft. 

(58) .  (No.  3700).  Handled  cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  y/D,  loc.  321,  7.1  ft. 

(59) ’  (No.  3787).  Handled  cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  A(4),  lev. — 7-9  ft.  A 

(60) .  (No.  4074).  Feeding-cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  u6,  lev.  + 6.7  ft.  A 

Plate  XXVI.  Pottery  Vessels  {Hara'pipa  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  5151).  Perforated  ware.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  35,  lev.  + i3-6  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  4384).  Perforated  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  423,  lev.  + 0.5  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  4073).  Perforated  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  1 16,  lev. 6.6  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  2665).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  167,  lev. -|- 10.9  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  1795).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  31 1,  lev.  -f-  7.2  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4241).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev.  16.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  4295).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  -f-  8.5  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  4296).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  + 8.6  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3855).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 8.9  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  r922).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  216,  lev.  1 1-8  ft-  A 

(11) .  (No.  4999).  Jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J;  loc.  18,  lev.  14.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  5005).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  + 14.3  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  5062).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Cut.  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  485,  lev.  — 0.5  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  200).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  C(2),  lev. — 6.0  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  5229).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  1,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37,  lev.  i3-i  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  4583).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  pis.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  20,  lev.  + 16.7  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  5327).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  12.0  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  5070).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  1,  sq.  I2/K,  loc.  21,  lev.  -f-  14.2  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  89).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 6.1ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  116).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  C(2)  lev. — 5.2  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  90).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  B(0,  lev.  — 5.2  ft. 


272 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


C22).  (No.  5255).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37,  lev.  -f-  13-0  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  2817).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  10. i ft. 

(24) .  (No.  5228).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37,  lev.  + R- 

(25) .  (No.  873).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 5.2  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  4044).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  425,  lev.  -j-  6.8  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3936).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 3-8  ft.  A 

(28) .  (No.  1373).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 3.1ft.  A 

(29) .  (No.  1046).  Jar-cover.  Gr.  pas.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 1.8  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  4485).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  306,  lev.  -f-  7.7  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  3851).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  £(5),  lev. — 9.9  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  4927).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  28,  lev.  -|-  14.5  ft.  A 

(33) -  (No.  1363).  Jar-cover.  Gr.  pas.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 6.4  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  2832).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  346,  lev.  8.5  ft. 

(35) -  (No.  2699).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  + 9-7  ft- 

(36) .  (No.  3514).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  273,  lev.  + 8.1  ft.  A 

(37) -  (No.  3514).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  273,  lev.  + 8.1  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  4998).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  29,  lev.  -j-  14.9  ft.  A 

(39) .  (No.  3906).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 4-3  ft.  A 

(40) .  (No.  2765).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  234,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  2357).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  10.7  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  2912).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev.  -j- 9-7  ft. 

(43) .  (No.  3514).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  273,  lev.  + 8.1  ft.  A 

(44) .  (No.  2986).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  251,  lev.  7.2  ft.  A 

(45) .  (No.  4277).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  + 7-4  ft-  A 

(46) .  (No.  5328).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  17.8  ft. 

(47) .  (No.  1855).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99,  lev.  -J-  n.oft. 

(48) .  (No.  5221).  Jar-cover.  Gr.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  10,  lev.  + 13.9  ft. 

(49) .  (No.  4284).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  + 7-4  ft-  A 

(50) .  (No.  4879).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  440,  lev.  -f  6.7  ft. 

(51) .  (No.  4662).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  281,  lev.  -|-  7.6  ft. 

(52) .  (No.  4372).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  452,  lev.  + 7.6  ft. 

(53) -  (No.  2780).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  234,  lev.  ii.i  ft.  A 

(54) .  (No.  4810).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  331,  lev.  + 7-5  ft- 

(55) -  (No.  5249).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  RT  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  I3/K,  loc.  12,  lev.  -|-  i3-9ft. 

(56) .  (No.  4140).  Partitioned  tray.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  341,  lev.  + 6.6ft.  A 

(57) -  (No.  4730).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  17,  lev.  + 15.8  ft. 

(58) .  (No.  4229).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  + 7-o  ft.  A 

(59) -  (No.  4016).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  9/F,  loc.  404,  lev.  + 4-9  ft-  A 

(60) .  (No.  2816).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + 10.3  ft. 

(61) .  (No.  565).  Sherd.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  B(2),  lev.  — 10. i ft.  A 

(62) .  (No.  3658).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  G(i),  lev. — 3-8  ft. 

(63) .  (No.  3973).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  1 14,  lev.  + 7.2  ft.  A 

(64) .  (No.  728).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 0.9  ft.  A 

(65) .  (No.  434).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  D(0,  lev,  — 1.5  ft. 

(66) .  (No.  2516).  Jar.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192,  lev.  -h  14.3  ft. 

(67) .  (No.  4989).  Sherd.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  421,  lev.  + 0.5  ft.  A 
(67,  a).  (No.  2886).  Sherd.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  290,  lev.  -|-  9.9  ft.  A 

(68) .  (No.  3969).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — 5.6  ft. 

(69) .  (No.  2988).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev.  -J-  8.5  ft. 

(70) .  (No.  4297).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  300,  lev.  + 6.1  R.  A 

(71) -  (No.  5275).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev. — 2.9  ft. 

(72) -  (No.  4406).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Br.  sips.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev.  + 10. o ft. 

(73) -  (No.  2224).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  20.0  ft  A 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


273 


(73,  a).  (No.  5098).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  lev.  + 14-2  ft. 

(74) .  (No.  1180).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — 4-3  ft. 

(75) -  (No.  5118).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — 2.3  ft 

(76) .  (No.  4563}.  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  238,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(77) .  (No.  5099).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  lev.  + 14.2ft. 

(78) .  (No.  3793).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  A(4),  lev. — 6.1ft.  A 

(79) .  (No.  4404).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  230,  lev.  + 8.8  ft. 

(80) .  (No.  5409).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Cut.,  lo/G,  lev.  — 18.6  ft. 

(81) .  (No.  5367).  Jar.  Dr.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Cut,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — 10. i ft. 

(82) .  (No.  4975).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  298,  lev.  + 8-i  ft. 

(83) .  (No.  3801).  Jar.  Gr.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 10.2  ft. 

(84) .  (No.  4694).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  6.9  ft.  A 

(85) .  (No.  987/.  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 5.2  ft.  A 

(86) .  (No.  635).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  A(3),  lev. — 1.8  ft. 

(87) .  (No.  2786).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  194,  lev.  10.9  ft. 

(88) .  (No.  5094).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  10/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(89) .  (No.  2821).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  241,  lev.  10.6  ft. 

(90) .  (No.  5210).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. . — i.o  ft. 

(91) .  (No.  5334).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  — 5.4  ft. 

Plate  XXVll.  Pottery  Vessels  (Harapfa  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  5432).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Find.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 18.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  5438).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 24.8  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3905).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 4-3  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  4805).  Dish.  Dr.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480,  lev. — 0.3  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  2161).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  J(i),  lev. — 7.8  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4527).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  278,  lev.  + 7-5  ft* 

(7) .  (No.  5092).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  3751).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Trench  6(5),  lev.  — 10.2  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3805).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  A(3),  lev. — 7.8  ft.  A 

(10) .  (No.  4267).  Bowl.  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  + 0.9  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4671).  Bowl.  Dr.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  + 0.9ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2833).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  346,  lev.  4- 8.8  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  600).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  C(2),  lev. — 4.9  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2888).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  260,  lev.  -J-  10. oft. 

(15) .  (No.  5308).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  + 12.7  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2996).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  4- 8.6  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  2316).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  131,  lev.  + 11.2  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  1161).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 4.6ft. 

(19) .  (No.  306).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B(3),  loc. — 4*9  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  2707).  Bowl.  Gr.  pas.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  273,  lev.  4-  9-6  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3391).  Bowl.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/E.  loc.  124,  lev.  4-  16. i ft. 

(22) .  (No.  5244).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  8,  lev.  4-  14*1  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3015).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  254,  lev.  9.3  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  2163).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  120,  lev.  *4  12.  o ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  4945).  Bowl.  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  & Gr.  sips.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  4-  o*8  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  5197).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  51,  lev.  4-  12.8  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3870).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 6.9  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  4613).  Bowl.  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  378,  lev.  4 5*5  ft-  A 

(29) .  (No.  2112).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev.  4 13.7  ft.  A 

(30) .  (No.  2775).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  4 9- 1 ft. 

(31) .  (No.  3298).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  97,  lev.  4 9*4  ft. 

(32) .  (No. 5055).  Bowl.  Dr.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  4 o-8  ft.  A 


274 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(33) .  (No.  4468).  Oval  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev. 6.8  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  204).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  C(2),  lev. — 4-3  ft-  A 

(35) .  (No.  27).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  C(i),  lev. — 3.2  ft.  A 

(36) .  (No.  3968).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  C(3),  loc.  36,  lev.  — 5.6  ft.  A 

(37) .  (No.  432).  Dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 1.5  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  154).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas  . Cr.  sip.  Trench  B(i),  lev.  — 5.8  ft. 

(39) .  (No.  1155).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 0.0  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  5325).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  + 12.0  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  729).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  D(i},  lev.  — 1.3  ft.  A 

(42) .  (No.  531).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  6(3),  lev. — 5-7  ft. 

(43) .  (No.  2265).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  98,  lev. -f- 12.0  ft.  A 

(44) .  (No.  341).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  C(2),  lev. — 9-7  ft-  A 

(45) .  (No.  29).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  A(i),  lev.  — 3.0  ft. 


(46)- 

(No. 

5385)- 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Cut.,  sq. 

lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  — 6.9  ft. 

(47)- 

(No. 

3603)- 

Bowl. 

Gr.  pas. 

Trench  I(i),  lev.  + 0.7  ft. 

(48)- 

(No. 

2977). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  -j-  14.3  ft.  A 

(49)- 

(No. 

4403). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  232,  lev.  -f-  9-7  ft-  A 

(50)- 

(No. 

5115)- 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas 

. Pnk.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37,  lev. 

+ 

13. 1 ft. 

(5t)- 

(No. 

3109). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  + 10. 0 ft. 

(52)- 

(No. 

5390)- 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 7.2  ft. 

(53)- 

(No. 

2528). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  -j-  10. i ft. 

C54)- 

(No. 

1090). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Pnk.  sip 

. Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 9-5  ft. 

(55)- 

(No. 

3073)- 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  156,  lev.  + i4-5  ft- 

(56)- 

(No. 

4402). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Cr.  sip. 

Sq.  9/E,  loc.  254,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 

C57)- 

(No. 

4932). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  1.7  ft.  A 

(58)- 

(No. 

3287). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  97,  lev.  + 10.6  ft.  A 

O9)- 

(No. 

3702). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl.  pt.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  43,  lev.  — 5.9  ft.  A 

(60). 

(No. 

2829). 

Bowl. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Cr.  sip. 

Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  8.7  ft.  A 

(61) .  (No.  930).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  A(3),  lev. — 4.1ft. 

(62) .  (No.  1129).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  I(i),  lev.  + 1.5  ft. 

(63) .  (No.  825).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  C(3),  loc.  26,  lev.  — 5.0  ft.  A 

(64) .  (No.  3490,  B).  Bowl.  Gr.  pas.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  +9.1  ft.  A 

(65) .  (No.  4571).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  394,  lev.  7.5  ft.  A 

(66) .  (No.  3345).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  15 1,  lev. -j- 12.0  ft.  A 

(67) .  (No.  2694).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  205,  lev.  4-  9-3  ft- 

(68) .  (No.  2225).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  1 12,  lev.  + 13-4  ft. 

(69) .  (No.  2337).  Cosmetic  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 15.2  ft. 

(70) .  (No.  3302).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  443,  lev.  -f- 6.7  ft.  A 

(71) .  (No. 852).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B( 5),  loc.  56,  lev. — -1.7ft. 

(72) .  (No.  4093).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  1 15,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(73) .  (No.  5199)-  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  -j-  12.9  ft. 

(74) .  (No.  1301).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  J(i),  lev. — 5-9  ft.  A 

(75) .  (No.  5049).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  0.5  ft. 

(76) .  (No.  499).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Trench  E(i),  loc.  33,  lev.  — 2.7ft.  A 

(77) .  (No.  3380).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 7-5  ft. 

(78) .  (No.  4232).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Sq.  lo/C,  loc.  385,  lev.  + 6.9  ft.  A 

(79) .  (No.  4230).  Insect  cage.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  -p  7.1  ft. 

(81) .  (No.  1875).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  G(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — i.oft. 

(82) .  (No.  786).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 3.2  ft. 

(83) .  (No.  3264).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.&Rd.pts.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev.  + 13.7 ft.  A 

(84) .  (No.  472).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — - 9.0  ft.  A 

(85) .  (No.  2916).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  -f-  9.5  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


275 


(86) .  (No.  3459).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  244,  lev.  + 6.9  ft.  A 

(87) .  (No.  2271).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  + 14. i ft.  A 

(88) .  (No.  4360).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  31 1,  lev.  + 7.2  ft. 

(89) .  (No.  5126).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — i.o  ft. 

(90) .  (No.  4909).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  12,  lev. -j- 13.1  ft. 

(91) .  (No.  1023).  Cos.  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  A( 2),  lev. — 8.6  ft. 

(92) .  (No.  3484).  Cos.  jar.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 

Plate  XXVllI.  Pottery  and  Pottery  Groups  (Harappa  Cidture).  Chapter  VI. 

(1) .  (No.  2349).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  98,  lev.  + 12.4  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2711).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  205,  lev.  -j-  lo.o  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  3271).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  166,  lev. -p  L- 

(4) .  (No.  2698).  Incised  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev. -j- 9.7  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2243).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 11.7  ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  4919).  Incised  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  301,  lev.  + 7.9  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  4869).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  445,  lev.  + 6.7  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4861).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  280,  lev.  + 7-°  E- 

(9) .  (No.  125).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Trench  A(i),  lev.  — 3.4  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3047,  D).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  3047,  E).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  3047,  D).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  3047,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  3047,  C).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  3047, 1).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  -|- 6.8  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  3047,  G).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  3047,  H).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  3283,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  276,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  3283,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E.  loc.  276,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  3283,  D).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  276,  lev.  +9.4  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  3283,  C).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  276,  lev.  +9.4  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  3283,  G).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  276,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3283,  F).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/E.  loc.  276,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  866,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 10.5  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  866,  F).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 10.5  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  866,  E).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 10.5  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  866,  C),  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i).  loc.  42,  lev.  — 10.5  ft.  A 

(28) .  (No.  866,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  —10.5  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  866,  D).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 10.5  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3489,  D).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

C31).  (No.  3489,  B).  Bowl  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev. 

-|-  9.1  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  3489,  C).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  1844).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Jhukar.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  + i7-5ft- 

(34) .  (No.  1843).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Jhukar.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  + 17.5  ft.  A 


276 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(35) '  (No.  3150,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  306,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  3150,  D).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  306,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(37) -  (No.  3150,  C).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  306,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(38) .  (No. 2594,  N).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + 9-9  R-  A 

(39) .  (No.  2594,  M).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev. -|- 9-9  R-  A 

(40) .  (No.  2594,  O).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  2594,  P).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev. -|- 9.9  ft.  A 
»»»»»»»»»¥ 

(42) .  (No.  995).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 2.0  ft. 

(43) .  (No.  996).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 2.0  ft.  A 

(44) .  (No.  997).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 2.0  ft.  A 

(45) ,  (No.  4657,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 5.9  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  4657,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 5-9  ft- 

(47) .  (No.  4657,  C).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 5.9  ft.  A 

(48) .  (No.  4657,  D).  Bowl.  Cr.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  + 5-9  ft. 

(49) .  (No.  301 1,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  -(- 9.6  ft.  A 

(50) .  (No.  3011,  C).  Jar.  Cr.  pas.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 

(51) .  (No.  3009,  D).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  + 8.9  ft. 

(52) .  (No.  3009,  C).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  + 8.9  ft. 

(53) .  (No.  3009,  B).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  + 8.9  ft.  A 

(54) .  (No.  3009,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  + 8.9  ft.  A 

(55) -  (No.  2728).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 1 0.0  ft. 

(56) .  (No.  3988).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  427,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(57) -  (No.  4779).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — i.oft. 

(58) .  (No.  4777).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  — i.i  ft. 

(59) -  (No.  3654).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Trench  E(i),  loc.  32,  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 

(60) .  (No.  3783).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Purp.  sips.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev.  + 7-5  ft-  A 

(61) .  (No.  5398).  Perforated  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 13.4  ft. 

(62) .  (No.  3536).  Perforated  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  295,  lev.  + 7-4  ft-  A 

(63) .  (No.  1782).  Perforated  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  163,  lev.  -j-  14-t  ft- 

(64) .  (No.  4666).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  248,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(65) .  (No.  3241).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev. -j- 7- 1 ft.  A 

(66) .  (No.  5090).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  474,  lev.  -|-  0.9  ft. 

(67) .  (No.  4095).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  94,  lev. 7-7  ft. 

(68) .  (No.  5079).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  21,  lev.  -j-  14.5  ft. 

(69) .  (No.  4362).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.pt.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  + 8.5  ft. 

Plate  XXIX.  Pottery  and  Other  Objects  (Harappa  Culture).  Chapters  VI;  VIII;  XIII 

(1) .  (No.  3343).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  125,  lev.  -|-  10.4  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  4390).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  -j-  6.9  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  4500).  Jar.  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev.  -|-  16.3  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  4398).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  + 9-6  ft. 

(5) -  (No.  3003).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  313,  lev.  -j-  lo.o  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4801).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/G,  loc.  483,  lev. — 0.9  ft. 

(7) -  (No.  4528).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev. -j- 9-6  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  4922).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  301,  lev.  + 7.9  ft.  A 

(9) -  (No.  868).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  A(i),  lev.  — 5.6  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  27 

(10) .  (No.  680).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 4.7  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3966).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  + 7.6  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  3960).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  -|-  7.6  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  5410).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 23.8  ft, 

(14) .  (No.  982).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(0,  lev. — 4.6  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  5046).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  + 0.8  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2515).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  -}-  n.oft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  3759).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 6.6  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  5387,8).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  — 6.8  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  2784).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  156,  lev.  + 9.7  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  2968).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  363,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  2744).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  235,  lev.  -f-  9.9  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  2731).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  246,  lev.  -p  9.6  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  3595).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 8.5  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  5045).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  + 10.8  ft. 

O5L  (No.  5215).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  ra/K,  loc.  27,  lev.  T 13.5  ft. 

(26).  (No.  5°57^-  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev.  -j-  14.1  ft.  A 
C?)-  (No.  53^6).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  -p  11.7  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  4811).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev. -p  8.1  ft.  A 

(29) .  (No.  5003).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18,  lev.  + 14.9  ft.  A 

(30) -  (No.  4156).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  207,  lev.  -p  7.7  ft.  A 

(31) .  (No.  3100).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  + 9.5  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  5411).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev. — 22.4  ft. 

(33) -  (No.  851).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Trench  I(i),  lev.  — 6.7  ft. 

(34) -  (No.  3004).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  309,  lev. -P  9.7  ft. 

(35) -  (No-  4M)-  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — i.i  ft. 

(36) -  (No.  2976).  Cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  + 14.0  ft. 

C3C  a).  (No.  4617).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  10,  lev.  + 16.2  ft. 

(37) -  (No.  2596).  Pan.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev. -p  9-3  ft. 

(3^)-  (No.  3959).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  1 71,  lev.  + 7.7  ft.  A 

(39) .  (No.  2697).  Jar.  Dr.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  2700).  Jar.  Pnk  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  + 9.7  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  2708).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  272,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  2709).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  272,  lev.  + 9.6  ft.  A 

(43) .  (No.  3275).  Bowl.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 9.5  ft.  A 
(43>a).  (No.  5007).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  188,  lev. -p  7.9  ft.  A 

(44) .  (No.  2239).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  -P  10.2  ft.  A 

(45) -  (No.  5078).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  i2/K,  loc.  21,  lev.  -p  14.2  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  3419).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  + 6.5  ft. 

(47) -  (No.  2984).  Dish.  Gr.  san.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  308,  lev.  -p  lo.o  ft. 

(48) .  (No.  2245).  Dish.  Gr.  san.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  191,  lev.  + 1 1.6  ft.  A 

(49) .  (No.  1721).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 14.9  ft. 

(50) .  (No.  2176).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  94,  lev.  12.1  ft.  A 

(51) .  (No.  1617).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  144,  lev.  + 12.9  ft.  A 

(52) .  (No.  1980).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  ,Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + 14.6  ft. 

(53) -  (No.  3080).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  425,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.  A 

(54) -  (No.  4720).  Neck  and  mouth  of  jar.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  gl.  2.09  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  35, 

lev.  + 13.6  ft. 

(55) -  (No.  1487).  Cosmetic  jar.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  gl.  1.3  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  -p  17.7  ft. 

(56) .  (No.  4743).  Cosmetic  jar.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  gl.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18,  lev.  + 13.9  ft. 

(57) -  (No.  5109).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas  . Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  421,  lev.  — i.o  ft. 

(58) .  (No.  2054).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  ?. 

(59) -  (No.  2054).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  G(0,  lev  ?.  A 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


278 

(60) .  (No.  1035).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 5.2  ft. 

(61) .  (No.  1163).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 2.5  ft.  A 

(62) .  (No.  2756).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  362,  lev.  + 6.7  ft. 

(64) .  (No.  1828).  Jar-cover.  Sh.  1.32  di.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  116,  lev.  11.5  ft. 

(65) .  (No.  2333).  Jar-cover.  Sh.  1.28  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  241,  lev.  + i i.o  ft. 

(66) .  (No.  3409).  Jar-cover.  Sh.  1.27  di.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  261,  lev.  -j-  7.5  ft. 

(67) .  (No.  1671).  Head-cone.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  gl.  2.3  hi.  1.3  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  132,  lev.  + 16.5  ft.  A 

(68) .  (No.  1600).  Head-cone.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  gl.  Now  2.8  hi,  1.3  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  150,  lev. 

-f  16.7  ft. 

(69) .  (No.  4844).  Jar-stopper.  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(70) .  (No.  1376).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 3.0  ft. 

(71) .  (No.  1794).  Jar-cover.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  119,  lev.  -f-  11.7  ft. 

(72) .  (No.  377).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 4.3  ft. 

(73) .  (No.  2897).  Jar-stopper.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev.  -f  9.8  ft. 

Plate  XXX.  Painted  Sherds  {Haraffd  Ctdture).  Chapter  VI 

(O-  (No.  3592).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  7.1  Ig.  Trench  l(i),  lev.  — 5.8  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  776).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 4.6  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  3472).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.1  Ig.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  271,  lev.  + 9.2  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  776).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 8.7  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  3581).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.7  Ig.  Trench  E(i),  lev.  — 0.2  ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  780).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 3-9  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  541).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.84%.  Trench  B(3),  lev. — 6.1ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  906).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.9  Ig.  Trench  B( 3),  lev. — 4.2  ft.  A 

(9) -  (No.  3580).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  BI.pt.  Trench  E(i),  lev, — 0.2  ft.  A 

(10) .  (No.  2895).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  113,  lev.  -p  lo.i  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  975).  Pnk,  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 2.1ft. 

(12) .  (No.  5163).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — i.o  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  3402).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.01  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  + 14.3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  1330).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.0  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 3.4  ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  3281).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  168,  lev.  + ii.i  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  3611).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.2  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 2.7ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  1466).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F( 2),  lev. — 4.6  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  1331).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  ?. 

(19) .  (No.  4736).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  loc.  ?,  lev.  ?. 

(20) .  (No.  4655).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.61  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  163,  lev.  -f  11.5  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  5117).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  474,  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1679).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  ?. 

(23) .  (No.  3338).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  145,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  5373).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt  Cut,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  —9.4  ft 

Plate  XXXI.  Painted  Sherds  (Harappd  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  1556).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.9  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 3-2,  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  5440).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 18.3  ft. 

(3) -  (No.  5440).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 18.3  ft. 

(4) -  (No.  1244).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.93  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 4.8  ft.  A 

(5) .  (No.  5442).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 18.3  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  5175).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — 1.2  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  5436).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 20.5  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4848).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev.  8.1  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  5216).  Pnk.  pas.  Bf.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  22,  lev.  -f-  13.3  ft. 

(10).  (No.  5201).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 9.3  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  279 

(11) .  (No.  5442).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 18.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  5445).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 18.6  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  3922).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Bf.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 10.3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2280).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.4  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  134,  lev.  -k  12.2  ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  4047).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4-4  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev. -j- 8-o  ft-  A 

(16) .  (No.  3284).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Trench  6(5),  lev.  — 6.7  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  4640).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  i,  lev.  -f-  i5-8  ft- 

(18) .  (No.  975).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 2.1ft. 

(19) .  (No.  3668).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4.2  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  3575).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  5.53  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev.  — 2.7  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  3902).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  A(4),  lev. — 4.2  ft, 

(22) .  (No.  4525).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  346,  lev.  6.9  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  5329).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  348,  lev. — -3.7  ft. 

Plate  XXXII.  Painted  Sherds  (Harapfa  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  3922).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  B( 3),  lev.  — 10.3ft. 

(i,  a).  (No.  3922).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 10.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  4299).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev.  -|-  12.5  ft. 

(3) -  (No.  1557).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5-1  Ig.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4-5  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  5113).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  1,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev.  13.3  ft. 

(5) -  (No.  5448).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 18.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  5372).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev.  — 12.5  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  4740).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Br.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  26,  lev.  -j-  15.7  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  3284).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 6.7  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3745).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.23  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 4.4  ft.  A 

Plate  XXXlll.  Painted  Sherds  (Harappd  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  1069).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 6.5  ft. 

(2) ,  (No.  3797).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.0  Ig.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 6.8  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  3621).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.1  Ig.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 4-5  ft-  A 

(4) .  (No.  907).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.3  di.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 7.8  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  966).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.9  Ig.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  ? A 

(6) .  (No.  3671).  Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  & Wh.  sips.  Bl.  Rd.  & Wh.  pts.  2.99  Ig.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  250, 

lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  5280).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 3.1  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4656).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  195,  lev.  -J-  7.0  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3583).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 4.8  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4656).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  195,  lev.  + 7.0  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  1467).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4.6  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3878).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  7.6  Ig.  Trench  B( 5),  lev. — 3.3  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  o).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt. 

(14) .  (No.  3872).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.1  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 8.1ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  1558).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  BI.pt.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  73,  lev. — 3.4  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  3516).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.9  Ig.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 5.8  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  4474).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  269,  lev. 6.7  ft.  A 

Plate  XXXIV.  Painted  Sherds.  (Harappd  and  Jhukar  Cultures).  Chapters  VI;  VII 
Harappa  Sherds. 

(1) .  (No.  1469}.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4.6  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  too).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.42  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 4.2  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  3419).  Inscription  on  jar  (PI.  XXXIX,  24).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171, 

lev.  + 6.8  ft. 


200 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(4) .  (No.  2288).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  195,  lev.  + ii.oft. 

(5) .  (No.  1876).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — 7-9  ft-  A 

(6) .  (No.  5443).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 21.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  5441).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/C,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 22.0  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  776).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 4.6  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  5373).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/C,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 9.4  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  1090).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(i),  lev. — 9-5  ft- 

(11) .  (No.  876).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.0  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 0.2  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  991).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.12  Ig.  Trench  E(i),  lev. — 5-9  ft-  A 

(13) .  (No.  4286).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.9  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18,  lev. 

-f-  15.6  ft.  A 

(14) .  (No.  1381).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.2  Ig.  Trench  A(4),  lev.  + i-o  ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  776).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 4.6  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  3668).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 4.2  ft.  A 

Jhukar  Sherds. 

(17) .  (No.  1869).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  3.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 18.5  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  1938.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.1  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  -(-  16.0  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  2373).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  4.3  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  180,  lev. 

+ 14.8  ft.  A 

(20}.  (No.  2269).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  3.3  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  173,  lev.  + 15.8  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  1755).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.82  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99,  lev. 

+ 17.7  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  1155).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 0.0  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  2282).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  4-9  Ig-  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  182,  lev.  + i3-7  ft-  A 

(24) .  (No.  1507).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 17-0  ft. 

Plate  XXXV.  Storage  Jars  (Haraffd  Culture).  Chafter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  503).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  21.2  hi.  Trench  B(3),  lev. — 6.5  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  3153,  A).  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  & Rd.  sips.  29.0  hi.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 10,  lev.  + 8.7  ft.  A 

(3) -  (No.  3491).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  30.75  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev.  + 8.6  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  4656).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  21.75  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  195,  lev.  + 7-°  ft.  A 


Plate  XXXVI.  Painted 


(1) .  (No. 

(2) .  (No. 

(3) -  (No. 

(4) -  (No. 

(5) .  (No. 

(6) .  (No. 

(7) .  (No. 

(8) .  (No. 

(9) .  (No. 

(10) .  (No. 

(11) .  (No. 

(12) .  (No. 

(13) -  (No. 

(14) .  (No. 

(15) -  (No. 

(16) .  (No. 
07)-  (No. 
(18).  (No. 


537^) 

5417) 

4363) 

662). 

3668). 

3785)- 

612). 

4502) 

3668) 

1237) 

5300) 

3381) 

5205) 

5192) 

5114) 

1216) 

5191) 

3668) 


* 

Pnk.  pas.  nu.  sip 


Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt. 
Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt. 
Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt. 

Pnlv'  TiJic  Rrl  dn  R1  -nt 


Chapter  VI 

Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev.  — 12.5  ft. 
Cut.,  sq.  lo/C,  loc.  481,  lev.  — i5-7ft. 
4.12  Ig.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  321,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 
Trench  D(i),  lev.  — ^8.1  ft. 

Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

Trench  A(2),  lev.  — 7.8  ft. 

Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 7.7  ft 


Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Mound 

I.  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev.  + 15.9  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Trench 

F(2),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

A 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

2.8  Ig. 

Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 

-3-7  ft- 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Bl.  pt.  Cut. 

, sq, 

. 9/C,  loc.  483,  lev.  — 4.9  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

5.42  Ig. 

Trench  D(i},  lev.  - 

-7.5  ft.  A 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Cut.,  sq. 

, lo/C,  loc.  481,  lev. 

— 1 1 .4  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Cut.,  sq. 

9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 

• 6.7  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Mound 

I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev.  + i3-4ft- 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

6.52  Ig. 

Trench  A/q),  lev.  - 

- 0.3  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Cut.,  sq 

. 9/F,  loc.  473,  lev.  - 

- 12.3  ft. 

Pnk. 

pas. 

Rd.  sip. 

Bl. 

pt. 

Trench 

F(2),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

A 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


281 

(19) .  (No.  2710).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.23  Ig.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  272,  lev.  + 9-o  R- 

(20) .  (No.  713).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.1  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 2.5  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3667).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.7  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 4.4  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  3280).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  8.49  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  + 10.9  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3671).  Pnk.  pas.  Yel.  & Wh.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  & Wh.  pts.  1.99  Ig.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc. 

250,  lev.  6.8  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  3213).  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  331,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  3668).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  3710).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.58  Ig.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 1.7  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3380).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 7.5  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  5362).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  425,  lev.  — 9.1  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3790).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  5.1  Ig.  Trench  A(4),  lev.  — 8.2  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3873).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  4.4  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 8.1ft. 

(31) .  (No.  3877).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.93%.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 3.3  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  4401).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  135,  lev.  + ii-3  ft. 

(33) -  (No.  1168).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.21  Ig.  Trench  6(5),  lev. — 4.7  ft.  A 

(34) .  (No.  4973).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev. -p  1 1.6  ft. 

(35) .  (No.  5371).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev.  — 12.5  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  4791).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.52  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  + 0.6  ft. 

(37) .  (No.  662).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 8.1  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  5436).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. — 20.5  ft. 

(39) .  (No.  1470).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 4.6  ft.  A 

(40) .  (No.  3650).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  E(i),  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  3668).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

Plate  XXXVII.  Painted  Sherds  (Harappa  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  5298).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/G,  loc,  483,  lev.  — 4.9  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  4996).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.19  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  I2/K,  loc.  31,  lev.  + 14’9  E. 

(3) .  (No.  5201).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev. — 9.3  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  5313).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 4.9  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2288).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.32  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  195,  lev.  + ii.oft. 

(6) .  (No.  608).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 4.9  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  4935).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  20,  lev.  + 13.5  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  3254).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  ?,  lev.  ? A 

(9) .  (No.  4298).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev.  + t2,.5  ft.  A 

(10).  (No.  5260).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/G,  loc.  479,  lev.  — 5.0  ft. 

(i  i).  (No.  5302).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  544).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.8  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 7.7  ft.  A 

(13) .  (No.  3277).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.91  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  93,  lev.  + 12,. 6 ft. 

(14) .  (No.  5418').  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 15.7  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  4938).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.22  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  30,  lev. -j- 1 3-7  E. 

(16) .  (No.  1162).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.16  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev.? 

(17) .  (No.  3434).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.22  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  + 9.8  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  3432).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  7.9  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 7.0  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  3183).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip,  Purp.pt.  3.52  Ig.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 19,  lev.  + io-6  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  662).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  D(0,  lev.  — 8.1  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  4798).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.26  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  + o-6  E. 

(22) .  (No.  3435).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  9.22  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  265,  lev.  + E.  A 

(23) .  (No.  3597).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 8.5  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  5361).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.28  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 9.0  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  5430).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. — 22.0  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  1689).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 3.2,  E. 

(27) .  (No.  5026).  Pnk.  pas.  Bf.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  32,  lev.  + 12.3  ft. 


282 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(28) .  (No.  3720).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.79  Ig.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 3-6  ft.  A 

(29) .  (No.  3395).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.7%.  Trench  B( 5),  lev. — 6.8  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  743).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.23  Ig.  Trench  B( 5),  lev. — 0.9  ft.  A 

(31) .  (No.  3133).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  4.0  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev. i3-9  ft-  A 

(32) .  (No.  409).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip  Bl.  pt.  4.38  Ig.  Trench  E(i),  lev.  — 3.5  ft.  A 

(33) .  (No.  4677).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  5314).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 5.0  ft. 

(34,  a).  (No.  4410).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  271,  lev.  + 7.2  ft. 

Oj)-  (No.  3725).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  4.92  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 7.6ft. 

(36) .  (No.  5312).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev. — 4-9  ft. 

(37) -  (No.  5392).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 13.4  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  3140).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.8  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  202,  lev.  + 12.8  ft. 

(39) -  (No.  749).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  7.3  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 7-4  ft.  A 

(40) .  (No.  3754).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  5.28  Ig.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 6.6  ft.  A 

(41) .  (No.  3709).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  6.2  Ig.  Trench  B( 5),  lev.  — 1.7  ft.  A 

(42) .  (No.  4301).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  5.58  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev.  -|-  7.4  ft. 

(43) .  (No.  5427).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 22.0  ft. 

(44) .  (No.  5429).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  -f  6.7  ft. 

(45) .  (No.  5271).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  23,  lev.  + 13-2.  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  538).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  2.2  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 7.7  ft. 

(47) .  (No.  5393).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  7.7  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — ■ i i.o  ft. 

(48) .  (No.  4798).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.26  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  -f-  0.6  ft. 

Plate  XXXVIII.  Incised  Sherds  (Haraffd  Culture).  Chapter  VI 

(1) .  (No.  3048).  Pnk.  pas.  2.82  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  258,  lev.  7.0  ft.  A 

(2) .  (5036).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  7.01  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  5032).  Pnk.  pas.  6.6  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  4789).  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 3.1ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  4749).  Pnk.  pas.  4.02  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  1.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  4036).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  5.2  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  + 8.4  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  564).  Pnk.  pas.  Trench  6(3),  lev.  — 7-7  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  5042).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev.  + 14.0  ft.  A 

(10) .  (No.  935).  Pnk.  pas.  2.9  Ig.  Trench  C(2),  lev. — 4.2  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  4340).  Pnk.  pas.  Br.  sip.  3.8  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  5342).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev. — 6.9  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  1247).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  4.62  Ig.  Trench  K(i),  lev. — 4.8  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  143).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  9.27  Ig  Trench  B(  i ),  lev. — 6.2  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  5403).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  sip.  5.1  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 

— 1 5. 1 ft. 

(16) .  (No.  4504).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  6.73  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468, 

lev.  -j-  3.8  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  3875).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  4.91  Ig.  Trench  H(i),  lev. 

— 8.1ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  4414).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  4.84  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192,  lev. 

-T  4.2  ft.  A 

(19) .  (No.  4465).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  1 1 1,  lev.  + 7-5  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  5356).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 8.2  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  1258).  Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  4.5  Ig.  Trench  FI (i),  lev. — 7.7  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  5416).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. — ^ 15.1  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  1042).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.88  Ig.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 4.5  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  5447).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  4.2  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 18.0  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  4272).  (Dish  of  food-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  3.2  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  134,  lev. 

-f-  6.8  ft.  A 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


283 


(26) .  (No.  3566).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  3.62  Ig.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — 7.9  ft.  A 

(27) .  (No.  5318).  Pnk.  pas.  Dk.  Gr.  & Lt.  Gr.  sips.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — 15.2  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  5378).  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 8.2  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  5404).  Pnk.  pas.  Purp.-bl.  & Gr.  (?)  sips.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 15. i ft. 

Plate  XXXIX.  Pottery  (]hangar,  Jhukar  and  Hara^-pd  Cidtures).  Chapters  VI;  VII;  VIII 
Jhangar  Pottery. 

(1) .  (No.  1816).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd,  mde.  6.91  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  19.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  1422).  Gr.  pas.  2.4  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  -f-  22.0  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  1832).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  8.65  hi.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  21.9  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  1448).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  2.36  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  19.3  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  1229).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  3.77  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev. 22.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  1831).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  3.4  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  -j-  22.2  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  1411).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  3.47  hi.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  93,  lev. 18.9  ft.  A 

(7,  a).  (No.  4732).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  2.3  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  -f-  0.9  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  1796).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  3.0  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  22.2  ft.  A 

Jhukar  Pottery. 

(9) .  (No.  5068).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Br.  pt.  2.4  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  21, 

lev.  + 14.3  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3182).  Pnk.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  6.5  hi.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  251,  lev.  -|-  7.2  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4802).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  2.2  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + 1.1  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  5035).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd  mde.  2.1  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  4742).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  2.9  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  25,  lev.  -/  15.9  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  1988).  Lamp.  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  1.8  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + i4-4  E. 

(15) .  (No.  2666).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.01  hi.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  142,  lev.  9.4  ft. 

Harappa  Pottery. 

(16) .  (No.  3481).  Tumbler.  Pnk.  pas.  3.4  hi.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  4- 7-9  E.  A 

(17) .  (No.  4140).  Partitioned  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  4.3  Ig.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  341,  lev. 

+ 6.6  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  4468).  Oval  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  4-7  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  3064).  Jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  + 12.6  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  4074).  Feeding-cup.  Pnk.  pas.  5.12  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  1 16,  lev.  + 6.7  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  4880).  Feeding-cup.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  3.0  Ig.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  440,  lev.  + 7.7  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  3484).  Kohl-jar.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  3.45  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  301 1,  A).  Jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  + 9.6  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  3419).  Inscribed  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.1  hi.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev. 

+ 6.8  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  5214).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  2.82  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  10,  lev. 

+ 14.0  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  5199).  Kohl-jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.24  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34, 

lev.  + 1 2.9  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  1004).  Insect  cage,  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Hnd.  mde.  3.2  hi.  Trench  A(3), 

lev.  — 4.4  ft.  A 

Plate  XL.  Pottery  (Muhammedan,  Harappa,  Jhangar  and  Jhukar  Cidtures).  Chapters  VI;  VII;  VIII 
Muhammadan 

(1) .  (No.  2231).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + 15.0  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2230).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + 15.0  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2232).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + 15.0  ft. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


284 

Late  Harappa(?) 

(4) .  (No.  3810).  Pnk.  pas.  Incis.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev.  + 16.0  ft. 

Jhangar. 

(5) .  (No.  1797).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  -j-  19.3  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4289).  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  slp.(?).  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  387,  lev. 7-o  R- 

(7}.  (No.  1833).  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  slp.(?).  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 18.9  ft.  A 

(7,  a).  (No.  1943).  Gr.  pas.  Bl.  slp.(?)-  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  + 2.0.0  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  1796).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  4-22.3  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  1832).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  -I-21.9  ft.  A 
(9,  a).  (No.  5206).  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  488,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  183O.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  -j-  22.7ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  1816}.  Gr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 19.7ft. 

Jhukar  Pottery. 

(12) .  (No.  2058).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.pt.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  ■ — 9.0  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2153).  Dr.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  113,  lev.  + i3-2ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2065).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 21.4  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  4476).  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  loc.  ?,  lev.  ?. 

(16) .  (No.  4478).  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  loc.  ?,  lev.  ?.  A 

(17) .  (No.  3670).  Incised  jar-cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/P,  loc.  145,  lev.  -f-  8.4  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  4742).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  25,  lev.  + i5-9  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  2510).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  + 1 7-6  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  2130).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + i4-3  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  2066).  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 20.8  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  3057).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  128,  lev. -f  1 1.5  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  4802).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + i.i  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  1788).  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  + 14.0  ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  1563).  Dr.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  -f-  18.0  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  2334).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev.  + i3-i  ft- 

(27) .  (No.  1425).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 15.5  ft.  A 

(28) .  (No.  4033).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  + 12.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2244).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  + 18.2  ft.  A 

(30) .  (No.  4788).  Incised  jar-stand.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 22.6  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  1861).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  -f-  18.9  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  1553).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 1 5-6  ft.  A 

Plate  XLI.  Pottery  (]h^^kar  Culture).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  2612).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  182, 

lev.  -j-  13-7  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  3135).  Frag,  of  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176, 

lev.  -f-  13.9  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3134).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev. 

+ 14.4  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  4743).  Frag,  of  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  & Br.  pts.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  16, 

lev.  -|-  16.0  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  3096).  Frag,  of  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev. 

+ 11.4  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3066).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev. 

+ 14.4  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  3127).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev. 

+ 13.9  ft.  A 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  285 

(8) .  (No.  5061).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc. 

486,  lev.  — 1.3  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3136).  Frag,  storage  jar.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev. 

+ 13-0  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3143).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  161,  lev.  + 14.4  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  1850).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev. -|- 18.8  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  1758).  Erag.  of  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90, 

lev.  + 15-3  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  3429).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev. -j- 17.2  ft.  A 

(14) .  (No.  3059).  Erag.  of  dish.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108, 

lev.  + II-7  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1902).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  + 15.9  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  1903).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  -j-  15.9  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  2266).  Pnk.  pas.  Purp.  pt.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  112,  lev.  i4-o  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  2099).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  93,  lev.  i8-oft.  A 

(19) .  (No.  3175L  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  -j-  15.0  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  3176).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  + i5-o  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  2712).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  277,  lev. -j- 9.6  ft.  A 

(22) .  (No.  2995).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev. -j- 15.5  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  2766).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  94,  lev.  -j-  9.9  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  4152).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Rd.  & Purp.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123.  lev.  -j-  9.9  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  1863).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 14.0  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  4257).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  -j-  2-8  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  2960).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev.  + 13.1  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  2091).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 22.7  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2242).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  + 13.0  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3285).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  135,  lev.  + 11.3  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  2104).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 15.2  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  2253).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev.  + 1 1.6  ft.  A 

(33) .  (No.  2155).  Dr.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  1 14,  lev. 15.9  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  1867).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 18.6  ft.  A 

(35) .  (No.  5068).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Br.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  21,  lev.  + i4-3  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  4294).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  445,  lev.  + 6.6  ft. 

(37) .  (No.  1817).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 19.8  ft.  A 

(38) .  (No.  3182).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  251,  lev.  + 7.  2 ft. 

(39) .  (No.  4610).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  471,  lev. -f- 2.8  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  1868).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + ip-o  ft.  A 

(41) .  (No.  2240).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  15.5  ft.  A 

(42) .  (No.  3937).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev. -j- 17-0  ft.  A 
(433.  (No.  2129).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev.  + 21.2  ft. 

(44) .  (No.  2098).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  -f  17-5  ft- 

(45) .  (No.  2534).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  258,  lev.  + 9-3  ft-  A 

(46) .  (No.  4729).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  -f-  0.8  ft. 

(47) .  (No.  1798).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  + 14. i ft. 

(48) .  (No.  2074).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  + i7-7  ft-  A 

(49) .  (No.  1799L  Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  -f-  16.4  ft. 

(50) .  (No.  1779).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  -j-  16.7  ft 

Plate  XLII.  Painted  Sherds  (Jhukar  Cidture).  Chafter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  1722).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.43  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.+ 18.8  ft  A 

(2) .  (No.  4582).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt  3.9  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  + 0.4  ft  A 

(3) .  (No.  4191).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.pt  Sq.  9/P,  loc.  401,  lev. -f  8.3  ft. 


286 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(4) .  (No.  2086).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  2.75  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev. i5-o  ft-  A 

(5) .  (No.  4191).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  401,  lev.  -j-  8.3  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4747).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  7.8  Ig.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  + 1.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  1871).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  6.35  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev.  -|-  18.8  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1848).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  1 14,  lev.  4- 1 7-7  ft-  A 

(9) .  (No.  2068).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.91  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 20.7  ft. 

(10).  (No.  4191).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  401,  lev.  -f-  18.3  ft. 

(i  i).  (No.  4573).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.1 1 Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  ?,  lev.  ? A 

(12) .  (No.  1509).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  + i9-i  ft-  A 

(13) .  (No.  4746/.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  2.62  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev. 

+ 1.3  ft.  A 

(14) .  (No.  1505).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.02  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev. -[- 19-1  ft-  A 

(15) .  (No.  4287).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.1  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  i8,Jev. 

+ 15.9  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  1849).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.42  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev.  + 1 7-5  ft-  A 

(17/.  (No.  4731).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.23  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev. 

+ 0.8  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  2920).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.93  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  131,  lev.  + 13.7  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1873).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.6  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 18.7  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  1872).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  2.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  -j-  18.6  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  4585).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.2  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  14,  lev.  16. i ft. 

(22) .  (No.  4498).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev.  15.9  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  4792).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.2  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  + 0.6  ft.  A 

(24) .  (No.  1861/.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  7.0  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  + 18.9  ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  1774).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  4.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 17-6  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  1862).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.33  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  94,  lev.  + 17. i ft.  A 

Plate  XLIIL  Painted  Sherds  (Jhnkar  Cidtnre).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  4567).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  9.8  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev. 

+ ^-4  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  1757)-  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.09  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99,  lev.  18.0  ft.  A 

(3) -  (No.  1756).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.62  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  + i4-9  ft- 

(4) .  (No.  1904).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.92  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  113,  lev. 

+ 17.2  ft.  A 

(5) -  (No.  3599).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.85  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  -|-  19.3  ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  1759)-  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.58  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 19-4  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  1758).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Red.  & Bl.  pts.  7.82  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev. 

+ 15-3  ft- 

(8) .  (No.  1767).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.4  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev. 

-f-  10.9  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  5153).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  13.8  ft. 

(10).  (No.  1935).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  7.2  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev. -f- 16.7  ft.  A 

(n).  (No.  1866).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.2  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev.  + 18.9  ft.  A 

(12).  (No.  2612).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  10.3  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  182,  lev. 

+ 13.7  ft.  A 

Plate  XLIV.  Painted  Sherds  (Jhukar  Cidtnre).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  1516).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.6  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev. -f  18.0  ft.  A 

(2) .  (No.  4637).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  3.8  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  ?,  lev.  ?,  A 

(3) -  (No.  4185).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  4.84  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  172,  lev.  -p  8.2  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  1939).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  + 16.5  ft.  A 

(5X  (No.  2146}.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  4.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  -(-  15.0  ft.  A 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


287 


(6) .  (No.  1845).  Pnk.  pas.  Purp.  pt  5.5  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  -(-  17.7  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  1940).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  -)-  20.0  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4309).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  5.6  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  -(-  12.4  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  4193).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.7  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  401,  lev.  8.3  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3600).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  7.6  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  + 19.3  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  1937).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  -|-  16.6  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  1777/.  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  pt.  6.02  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  17.6  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  3142).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  + 12.6  ft.  A 

(14) .  (No.  1933).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  7.78  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  loi,  lev.  -f-  16.5  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1723).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  5.37  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev. 

-j-  16.2  ft.  A 


Plate  XLV.  Painted  Sherds  (Trihni  and  Jhukar  Cultures).  Chafters  VII;  VIII 
Trihni  Pottery. 

Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  4.04  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  486,  lev. 

Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  5.73  Ig.  Trench  P(i),  lev.  — 1.6  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  1.72  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev.  — 3.8  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.82  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev.  — 3.8  ft.  A 
Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.9  Ig.  Trench  B(2),  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  5.4  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 2.1  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  5.26  Ig.  Trench  C(2),  lev.  — 5.8  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Bl.pt.  1.95  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 6.8  ft.  A 
Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.2  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev.  — 6.3  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.9  Ig.  Trench  B(i)7  lev.  — 5.6  ft.  A 
Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.75  Ig.  Trench  B(2),  lev.  — 4.6  ft. 

Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.3  Ig.  Trench  B(2),  lev. — 6.6  ft.  A 
Pnk.  sip.  Rd.pt.  2.15  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev. — 4-7  ft 


(0. 

(No. 

4551)- 

— 

1 .3  ft. 

(2). 

(No. 

815). 

(3). 

(No. 

107). 

(4)- 

(No. 

217). 

(5). 

(No. 

226). 

(6). 

(No. 

219). 

O)- 

(No. 

201). 

(8). 

(No. 

138). 

(9). 

(No. 

148). 

(to). 

(No. 

145)- 

(it). 

(No. 

225). 

(12). 

(No. 

384). 

(13)- 

(No. 

298). 

04)- 

(No. 

214). 

(15). 

(No. 

99)-  I 

(16). 

(No. 

1145). 

O?)- 

(No. 

221). 

(18). 

(No. 

75)-  I 

A 

A 


Pnk. 


pas 


Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  sip.  Bl.pt.  1.62  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev. — 4.2  ft.  A 
’nk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.77  Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 4.9  ft.  A 
Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  1.92  Ig.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — 1.5  ft. 
Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Br.  pt.  6.0  Ig.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 


Jhukar  Pottery. 

(19) .  (No.  3258).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.-Bl.  pt.  5.71  Ig.  Loc.  ?,  lev.  ? 

(20) .  (No.  1754).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  3.62  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. 

20.7  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  4934).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  4.85  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  13,  lev. 

14.2  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  2060).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  6.11  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev. 

+ 16.8  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  2251).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.44  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  + 14.8  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  2015).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4-9  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  + 13.3  ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  3102).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.42  Ig.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  218,  lev. 

1 1. 1 ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  2164).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  pt.  4.26  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev. 

16.8  ft.  A 

(27) .  (No.  3132).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev. 

-f-  1 5.0  ft.  A 

(28) .  (No.  2116).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.1  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  + 14.2  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3260).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.02  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev.  + 14-4  ft.  A 


288 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(30) .  (No.  2284).  Pnk.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  (?).  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.1  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  125,  lev. -|- i4-5  R- 

(31) .  (No.  3387).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.0  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev. 

-j-  14.1  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  4795).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  + o-t  E- 

(33) -  (No.  3058).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Purp.  pt.  4.0  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev. 

-f-  11.7  ft.  A 

(34) .  (No.  1945).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  + 18.3  ft. 

(35) -  (No.  342.4).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Loc.  ?,  lev.  + 14-3  ft- 

(36) .  (No.  4942).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Br.pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  lev.  472,  lev. -f*  °.6  ft.  A 

(37) -  (No.  2167).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.4  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev. 

+ 16.8  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  1847).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  5.61  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev. 

+ 17-5  ft. 

(39) -  (No.  1936).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  8.5  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  152,  lev.  + 16.6  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  3276).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  3.72  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  + 11.4  ft.  A 

(41) .  (No.  2134).  Pnk.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  (?).  Bl.pt.  5.92  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 15-7  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  2117).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  2.42  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  + 13.7  ft. 

Plate  XLVl.  Painted  Pottery  (Jhukar  Culture).  Cha-pter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  2610).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  8e  Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.67  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  107,  lev. 

+ 14-3  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  5132).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  7.86  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  — 1.2  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3842).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.71  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  4,  lev. 

-f-  17.8  ft.  A 

(4) .  (No.  2139).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.36  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99, 

lev. + 13.4  ft.  A 

(5) -  (No.  4611).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  3.88  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc. 

475,  lev,  + 3.8  ft.  A 

(6) .  (No.  3251).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.87  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  199,  lev. 

+ 13-4  ft- 

(7) .  (No.  3177).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.83  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192,  lev. 

-p  15.0  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  4814).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  7.59  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  472, 

lev.  -f-  1.9  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  4576).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  pt.  5.3  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  6, 

lev.  + 16.5  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  5265).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99,  lev.  + 16. i ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4302).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  5.9  Ig-  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  + 2.9  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  2121).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.pt.  4.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev.  + 1 5-3  ft-  A 

(13) .  (No.  1945).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  + 18.3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  3130).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  3.7  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  472,  + 2.8  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  4808).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.15  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev. 

+ 1 .3  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  2119).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  6.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev. 

+ i3-4ft- 

(17) .  (No.  2275).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.pt.  6.61  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 14-8  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2335).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  3.7%.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  169,  lev. -4- 12.7  ft.  A 

(19) .  (No.  4475).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.9  Ig.  Cut.,  loc.  (?),  lev.  (?). 

(20) .  (No.  5061).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  486,  lev.  — 1.3  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3140).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  2.8  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  202,  lev.  12.8  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  4512).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.76  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  379,  lev.  + 2..7  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  5295).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Br.  pt.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — 4.6  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  289 

(24) .  (No.  2132).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  1.97  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  161,  lev.  -}■  15.2  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  3070).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  4.38  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  + 13.9  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  3054).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.pt.  3.72  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  172,  lev. -f  11.4  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3107).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  177,  lev.  + i2,.3  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  3068).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.62  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  + 14.0  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  4577).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.pt.  5.31  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  + 16.3  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  4745).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  9.45  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev. 

+ 1-3  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  5131).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  — 1.2  ft.  A 

(32) .  (No.  1420).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.85  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  20.9  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  21 1 1).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  + 13.5  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  21 1 1).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  -j-  13.5  ft.  A 

(35) -  (No.  5311).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc  477,  lev.  — 5.8  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  1279).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  -f-  ft-  A 

(37) -  (No.  o).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Loc.  (?),  lev.  (?). 

(38) .  (No.  4269).  Dr.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  467,  lev.  4.0  ft. 

(39) '  (No.  3056).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Rd.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.0  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  199,  lev. 

+ 11.4  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  5266).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev.  + 18.5  ft. 

(41) .  (No.  2145).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.56  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  154,  lev. 

+ 16.7  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  2084).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.48  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev.  -|-  16.7  ft. 

(43) .  (No.  2113).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.93  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev. 

+ 14-3  ft-  A 

(44) .  (No.  2172).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  6.3  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  132,  lev.  16.5  ft. 

(45) .  (No.  4941).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.22  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  472,  lev. 

“F  0*4  ft-  A 

Plate  XLVII.  Painted  Pottery  (Jhukar  Culture).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  3065).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.pt.  7.1  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. -f  13.7  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2136).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.pt.  4.9  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  + 16.8  ft.  A 

(3) .  (No.  3055).  Pnk.  pas.  Gr.  sip.  (?)-  Bl.  pt.  3.22  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  172,  lev.  4-  ii-4ft- 

(4) .  (No.  2168).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  165,  lev. -}- 14-°  ft-  A 

(5) .  (No.  31 1 1).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 18,  lev.  -j-  ft-  A 

(6) .  (No.  4422).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480,  lev.  -j-  o-4ft- 

(7) .  (No.  2366).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  6.5  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  177,  lev. 

+ 12.9  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  2272).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.82  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev. 

+ 14.6  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  3033).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Br.  & Rd.  pts.  6.5  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  172,  lev.  + 11.4  ft.  A 

(10) .  (No.  3260).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  6.02  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev.  + 14.4  ft.  A 

(11) .  (No.  3095).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.87  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 12.5  ft.  A 

(12) .  (No.  1965).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.18  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + 16.4  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  1846).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  sip.  Rd.  & Bl.  pts.  5.72  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev.  + 18.1  ft. 
. (No.  2107).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev.  + 15.7  ft. 

(t4L  2083).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  + 15.7  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  314O-  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  8.3  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  + 12.9  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  2250).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev. 

4-  13.0  ft.  A 

(17) .  (No.  3264).  Pnk.  pas.  Pnk.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.83  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev. 

+ 13.7  ft.  A 

(18) .  (No.  2149).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  2.0  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 15.6  ft.  A 


290 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


C19).  (No.  1504).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  5.4  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  + 18.9  ft.  A 

(20) .  (No.  3108).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  3.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + I2,.8  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3249).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  5.12  Ig.  Sq.  y/E,  loc.  120,  lev.  + 13.8  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  2279).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.  pt.  3.7  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  + 15.8  ft.  A 

(23) .  (No.  3255).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  4.6  Ig.  Loc.  (?),  lev.  (?). 

(24) .  (No.  2367).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  6.6  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  177,  lev.  + i2,.9  ft.  A 

(25) .  (No.  2121).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Bl.  & Purp.  pts.  4.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev. 

+ 15.3  ft.  A 

(26) .  (No.  2166).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Purp.pt.  4.91  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. 16.9  ft.  A 

(27) .  (No.  1280).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  3.04  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 2.0.0  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  5264).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  pt.  Sq.  y/E,  loc.  99,  lev.  + 16.8  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3139).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.pt.  5.28  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  + 1 3- 1 ft-  A 

(30) .  (No.  2250).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Pnk.  sips.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.4  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev. 

+ 13.0  ft.  A 

(31) .  (No.  1965).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  9.18  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + 16.4  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  2615).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Bl.  & Rd.  pts.  7.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  105,  lev.  + 11.5  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  2045).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Rd.  pt.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  + 17.9  ft.  A 

(34) .  (No.  1799).  Pnk.  pas.  Yell.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 16.4  ft. 

(35) -  (No.  1779).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Purp.  & Rd.  pts.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  + 16.7  ft. 

Plate  XLVlll.  Incised  Pottery  (Jhukar  Culture).  Chapter  Vll 

(1) .  (No.  5281).  Pnk.  pas.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 2.5  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3918).  Pnk.  pas.  Hnd.  mde.  2.7  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  424,  lev.  + 3-2  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  1776).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  4.62  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  + 20.0  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  5000).  Pnk.  pas.  4.1  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18,  lev.  + 14.5  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2717).  Dr.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  3.13  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev.  + 8.5  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2273).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  4.7  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  + 14-1  ft.  A 

(7) .  (No.  2137).  Pnk.  pas.  Bl.  pt.  3.7  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 14.7  ft.  A 

(8) .  (No.  3268).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  7.2  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev.  + 12.5  ft.  A 

(9) .  (No.  3266).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev.  + 13.2  ft.  A 

(10) .  (No.  3385).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  94,  lev.  + 16.2  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4489).  Knob  of  jar  cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  3.7  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  iii,  lev. 

+ 7-9  ft-  A 

(12) .  (No.  2369).  Pnk.  pas.  6.3  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  168,  lev.  + 12.3  ft. 

(13) -  (No.  2808).  Knob  of  jar  cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  252,  lev.  + 9.3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  3125).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  6.44%.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev.  + 1 3.1  ft.  A 

(15) .  (No.  2268).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  181,  lev.  + 14.6  ft.  A 

(16) .  (No.  4148).  Dr.  pas.  Bf.  sip.  6.83  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  173,  lev. -|- 6.8  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  3422).  Knob,  of  jar  cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  1 19,  lev.  + 1 1.8  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  4575).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  4.1  Ig.  Cut.,  loc.  (?),  lev.  (?).  A 

(19) .  (No.  2103).  Pnk.  pas.  8.93  Ig.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  + ii.oft. 

(20) .  (No.  3143).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  161,  lev.  + 14.4  ft.  A 

(21) .  (No.  3399).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  6.0  Ig.  Sq.  y/E,  loc.  100,  lev.  -f-  14.6  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  4925).  Knob  of  jar  cover.  Pnk.  pas.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  14,  lev.  16.1  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  4799).  Pnk.  pas.  Rd.  & Cr.  sips.  Cut.,  sq.  9/G,  loc.  483,  lev.  — 0.9  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  3390).  Pnk.  pas.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 15.8  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  5256).  Pnk.  pas.  Cr.  sip.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  12,  lev.  + 13.9  ft. 

Plate  XLIX.  Seal-amulets  and  Impressions  of  the  Jhukar  Period.  Chapter  IX 

(1) -  (No.  1652).  Type  III.  Gr.  pot.  i.o  di.  X 0.63  th.  Two  animals  (oxen?),  one  placed 

above  the  other.  Vertical  markings  above.  Sq.  y/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  + 13.2  ft. 

(2) .  (2604).  Type  III.  Fai.,  cr.  surf.  0.98  di.  X 0.05  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  219,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


291 


(3) -  (No.  1946).  Type  III.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  0.92  di.  X 0.7  th.  Roughly  incised  parallel  lines  and 

rough  prickings.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  + 13.7  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  1918).  Type  III.  Fai.,  It.  gre.  i.i8  di.  X 0.6  th.  Back  ornamented  with  oblique 

incised  lines  close  to  edge.  Unintelligible  design  on  slightly  rounded  face.  Sq.  9/D, 
loc.  179,  lev.  -|-  14.9  ft. 

(5) .  (1426).  Type  III.  Fai.,  cr.  surf.  1.3  di.  X 1-2,  th.  Solar  motif  on  flat  face.  Sq.  8/E,  loc. 

103,  lev.  + 15.4  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3819).  Type  III.  Bl.  steat.  0.68  Ig.  X 0.62  wde.  X 0.28  th.  Notched  bevelled  edges. 

Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  -(-  13.6  ft. 

(7) .  (4213).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.2  di.  X o-6  th.  Rounded  faces  back  and  front  ornamented 

with  deep  prickings.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  470,  lev.  + 0.3  ft. 

(8) .  (4203).  Type  III.  Cop.  or  br.  o.8i  di.  X 0-42  th.  Flat  face  bearing  lightly  incised  con- 

ventional tree.  Presumably  cast.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  -|-  1.3  ft. 

(9) .  (1266).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.2  di.  X 0-52  th.  Back  rounded  & plain.  Impression  of 

animal  on  face,  with  head  to  left  and  two  indistinct  marks  above.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev. 
12.9  ft. 

(10) .  (1582).  Type  III.  Dr.  pot.  1.23  di.  X 0.31  th.  Handle  now  missing  from  back.  Two 

couchant  animals,  one  above  the  other,  but  no  further  details.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev. 
-f  17.9  ft. 

(11) .  (1726).  Type  1.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.21  di.  X 0-62  th.  Back  rounded  and  much  abraded.  Design 

on  face  unintelligible.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  159,  lev.  16.6  ft. 

(12) .  (3768).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.34  di.  X 0.68  th.  Face  nearly  flat  and  plain  rounded  back. 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + 2.7  ft. 

(13) .  (2011).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.34  di.  X 0.51  th.  Both  faces  rounded  and  much  abraded. 

Roughly  hatched  pattern  visible  only  on  one  side.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  -(-  11.5  ft. 

(14) .  (3917).  Type  III.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.32  di.  X o-7  th-  Almost  flat  face  bearing  a linear  design. 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  470,  lev.  + 3-^ft- 

(15) -  (i993)"  Type  III.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.6  di.  X i-4  th-  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  150,  lev.  + 12.8  ft. 

Plate  L.  Seal-amulets  and  Impressions  of  the  Jhukar  Period.  Chapter  IX 

(1) .  (4227)  (see  also  PI.  LXXXVII,  20).  Type  II.  Wh.  steat.  0.78  di.  X 0.38  th.  The  circum- 

ference of  this  amulet  is  ornamented  with  three  well-cut  grooves  giving  it  a fluted 
appearance.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev.  — o.i  ft. 

(2) .  (2680).  Type  1.  Lt.  rd  pot.  i .02  di.  X 0.62  th.  Both  faces  rounded;  lightly  incised  crossed 

irregular  lines.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  -f  9.5  ft. 

(3) .  (1575).  Type  IV.  Fai.,  It.  gre.  gl.  0.97 Ig.  X o-6i  wde.  X 0.31  th.  Slightly  rounded  faces. 

Designs  cut  with  sharp  instrument.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  -j-  1 7-3  ft- 

(4) .  (3497)  (see  PI.  LXXXVII,  i).  Tj-pe  1.  Hard  cr.  st.  0.79 di.  X 0.31th.  Faces  very 

rounded.  Edge  milled  and  0.17  th.  Very  carefully  made.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev. 

T ^-5  It- 

(5) .  (1911).  Type  II.  Yell,  pas.;  gre.  gl.  1.15  di.  X 0-4  th.  Two  grooves  round  circumference. 

Sq.  9/E,  loc.  220,  lev.  14.6  ft. 

(6) .  (1801).  Br.  steat.  0.6  Ig.  X 0.57  wde.  X 0.32  th.  Back  unfinished,  with  rectangular  handle 

measuring  0.39  X X 0.14  ins.,  and  pierced  by  small  hole.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  135,  lev. 

10.4  ft. 

(7) .  (1453)  (see  PI.  LXXXVII,  23).  Type  II.  Fai.,  blu.  gl.  0.92  di.  X 0.23  th.  Flat  faces. 

Frag,  of  copper  wire  in  hole.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  16.8  ft. 

(8) .  (1886).  Type  II.  Fai.,  gre.  gl.  0.9  di.  X 0-4  th.  Three  rough  grooves  round  circumference. 

Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  15.6  ft. 

(9) .  (1574).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  i.o  di.  X 0.7  th.  Faces  very  rounded.  Back  plain.  Svastika 

impressed  on  obverse.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  17.9  ft. 

(10).  (4003).  Type  II.  Fai.,  gl.  wh.  1.2  i.  X 0.43  th.  Flat  faces.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  472, 

lev.  -|-  2.6  ft. 


292 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(11) .  (2928).  Type  I.  Dr.  pot.  0.98  di.  X 0-41  th.  Faces  slightly  convex.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  252, 

lev.  +7-1 

(12) .  (1815).  Type  I.  Gr.  pot.  1.25  di.  X o-43  th.  One  side  only  impressed;  two  parallel  lines. 

Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev.  + 14.9  ft. 

C13).  (2488).  Type  III.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.23  di.  X 0.64  th.  Slightly  convex  face,  back  plain.  Sq. 
8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 14.9  ft. 

(14) .  (3840).  Type  I.  Lt.  red.  pot.  1.27  di.  X 0.6  th.  Slightly  rounded  faces.  Same  design  on 

both  sides.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  -f-  2.3  ft. 

(15) .  (2289).  Type  I.  Lt.  rd.  pot.  1.2  di.  X 0.62  th.  Faces  slightly  convex.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  225, 

lev.  X 10.3ft. 

(16) .  C1594).  Type  I.  Dk.  gr.  St.  1.2  di.  X o-4  th.  Bi-conical  hole  through  edge.  Sq.  8/C,  loc. 

109,  lev.  + 16.5  ft. 

Plate  LI.  Seal-amulets  of  the  Haraffa  Period.  Chapter  IX 

Ci)-  C3t9S)-  Yell,  steat.  0.65  X 0.6  X 0.32  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  + 8.8  ft. 

(2) .  (3052).  Gr.  steat.  1.07  X 1-07  X 0.4  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  + 7.8  ft. 

(3) -  (594)-  Br.  steat.  0.87  X 0.84  X 0.49  ins.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  56,  lev.  — 5.7  ft. 

(4) '  (518).  Gr.  steat.  1.64  X i-5  X 0.32  ins.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  56,  lev.  4-  0.8  ft. 

(5) -  C4770T  Cr.  steat.  0.9  X 0.9  X 0.6 ins.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  410,  lev.  — i.i  ft. 

(6) .  (3737)-  Gr.  steat.  0.62  X 0.67  X ? ins.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  459,  lev.  + 7-o  ft. 

(7) .  (3200).  Wh.  steat.  0.68  X 0.7  X 0.6  ins.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  344,  lev.  -f  6.9  ft. 

(8) -  (3159)-  Gr.  steat.  1.05  X i-o  X 0.4  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  -j-  7-8  ft. 

(9) .  (2000).  Gr.  St.  0.78  X 0.78  X 0.47  ins.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  223,  lev.  + 12.2  ft. 

(10) .  (4767).  Wh.  steat.  0.72  X 0.72  X 0.32  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  47,  lev.  + 13. i ft. 

(11) -  (34851  !•)■  Wh.  steat.  0.91  X 0-91  X 0-41  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  231,  lev.  -f-  7-2  ft. 

(12) .  (3493).  Gr.  steat.  0.75  X 0.75  X 0.42  ins.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  240,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(13) -  (3148)-  Wh.  steat.  1.41  X 1-38  X 0.73  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  113,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(14) -  (3^15)-  Wh.  steat.  0.75  X 0.78  X 0.43  ins.  Sq.  9/B,  loc.  283,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(15) .  (2285).  Wh.  steat.  1.04  X 1-04  X o-5  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(16) .  (3049).  Wh.  steat.  1.47  X 0.35  X 0.55  ins.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  + 6.5  ft. 

(17) -  (3495)-  Wh.  steat.  0.95  X 0.92  X 0.5  ins.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  98,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(18) .  (926).  Wh.  steat.  0.92  X 0-96  X o-5  ins.  Trench  E(i),  loc.  34,  lev.  — 7.1  ft. 

(19) .  (2845).  Wh.  steat.  i.i  X ? X ? ins.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  405,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(20) .  (2594,  h).  Wh.  steat.  1.09  X i-o8  X 0.51  ins.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(21) .  (1269).  Wh.  steat.  0.94  X 0.94  X 0.5  ins.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 4.1  ft. 

(22) .  (3207).  Wh.  steat.  0.83  X 0.82  X 0.39  ins.  Sq.  9/B,  loc.  442,  lev.  + 7.7  ft. 

(23) .  (2532).  Wh.  steat.  1.28  X 0.52  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  122,  lev.  -f- 9.4  ft. 

(24) .  (3051).  Wh.  steat.  1.5  X i-5  X ? ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev.  + 8.1  ft. 

(2.5T  (3817)-  Bl.  steat.  2.02  X i-49  X o.i  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  26,  lev.  + 14.1  ft. 

(26).  (3043).  Wh.  steat.  1.05  X 1-05  X 0.55  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  430,  lev.  + 7.3  ft. 

(3045)-  Wh.  steat.  i.i  X 1-09  X 0.61  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  177,  lev.  + 7-6  ft. 

(28) .  (2293).  Wh.  steat.  1.4  X 1-36  X 0.73  ins.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  261,  lev.  + 9-3  ft. 

(29) .  (2297).  Wh.  steat.  i.i  X i-i  X 0.41  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  + lo.oft. 

(3°)-  (3485;  Yell,  steat.  1.24  X 1-2.4  X 0.6  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  231,  lev.  -(-  7.2  ft. 

(31).  (1293).  Bl.  steat.  1.5  X i-5  X 0.76  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  97,  lev.  + 14.9  ft. 

(32.)-  (2361).  Wh.  steat.  1.3  X i-3  X 0.52 ins.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  + 10.9  ft. 

(33)-  (2462).  Wh.  steat.  1.44  X 1-44  X 0.75  ins.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

Plate  LII.  Seal-amulets  of  the  Harappd  Period.  Chapter  IX 

(1) .  (2597).  Wh.  steat.  1.37  X i-33  X 0.68  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192,  lev.  + 8.9  ft. 

(2) .  (2848).  Wh.  steat.  0.82  X 0-83  X 0.4  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  425,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(3) -  (3359)-  Wh.  steat.  0.7  X 0.71  X 0.42  ins.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  no,  lev.  + 7-i  ft- 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  293 

(4) .  (3168).  Wh.  steat.  1.17  X i-i?  X 0-42,  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev. -|- 8.1  ft. 

(5) -  (485^)-  Wh.  steat.  1.13  X 1-13  X 0.51  ins.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 2.8  ft. 

(6) .  (2390).  Wh.  steat.  1.18  X 1.2  X 0.7  ins.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  235,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

C?)-  (4327)-  Wh.  steat.  0.52  X 0-9  X 0.39  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  20,  lev.  14-8  ft. 

(8) .  (3886).  Gr.  steat.  i.i  X 1.13  X 0.33  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  6,  lev.  + 16.8  ft. 

(9) -  (950)-  Wh.  steat.  0.45  X 0.45  X 0.3  ins.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  73,  lev.  — o.i  ft. 

(to).  (3326).  Wh.  steat.  0.62  X 0.61  X 0.34  ins.  Sq.  10/C,  loc.  385,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(11) .  (3206).  Wh.  steat.  0.5  X 0.5  X 0.37  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  204,  lev.  -f  6.9  ft. 

(12) .  (2558).  Wh.  steat.  1.03  X 0.55  X 0.35  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  106,  lev.  -j-  8.8  ft. 

(13) .  (2603).  Wh.  steat.  0.75  X 0.75  X 0-23  ins.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  362,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

C14).  (2426}.  Wh.  steat.  0,91  X 0.91  X 0.42  ins.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  199,  lev.  -)-  9.0  ft. 

(15) -  (253O.  Wh.  steat.  i.oi  X i-oj  X 0.47  ins.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  -f  9.6  ft. 

(16) .  (1393).  Bl.  steat.  0.88  X 0.88  X 0.32  ins.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev.  -j-  15.4  ft. 

Ci?)-  (4960).  Gr.  steat.  0.9  X 0.9  X 0.42  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  9,  lev.  13.5  ft. 

C18).  (3154).  Wh.  steat.  0.88  X 0.89  X 0-41  ins.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  395,  lev.  -j-  7.7  ft. 

(19) .  (2428).  Br.  steat.  i.o  X i-Q  X 0.49  ins.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  286,  lev.  -f-  9.7  ft. 

(20) .  (2559).  Wh.  steat.  1.0  X 1.0  X 0.52  ins.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  296,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

C21).  (2358).  Wh.  steat.  1.0  X i-o  X 0.58  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev.  -j-  H-i  ft. 

(22) .  (2595).  Br.  steat.  0.8  X 078  X 0.42  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  164,  lev.  -f  9.3  ft. 

(23) .  (2529,  CC).  Wh.  steat.  0.82  X 0.81  X 0.43  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(24) .  (2605).  Wh.  steat.  1.09  X i.i  X 0.51  ins.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  159,  lev.  -f  8.4  ft. 

(25) .  (4596).  Wh.  steat.  I.OI  X i-oi  X °-5  ins.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  2,  lev.  -j-  14.4  ft. 

(26) .  (2467).  Wh.  steat.  1.12  X 1.12  X 0.6  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev.  -f-  10.5  ft. 

(27) .  (2468).  WT.  steat.  i.i  X 1-09  X 0.55  ins.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  189,  lev.  -J-  9.8  ft. 

(28) .  C3318).  Wh.  steat.  1.65  X 1-65  X o-8  ins.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  423,  lev.  + 6.7ft. 

(29) .  C381 1).  Gr.  steat.  1.2  X 1-2.  X 0.64  ins.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  + 3.8  ft. 

(30) -  (2389).  Gr.  steat.  1.25  X 1-25  X 0.69  ins.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  240,  lev.  -f-  9.2  ft. 

C31).  (2530).  Wh.  steat.  1.02  X X 0.5  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  300,  lev.  9.5  ft. 

(32)-  (3492)-  Gr.  steat.  1.07  X 1.08  X 0.55  ins.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev.  -f  8.6  ft. 

Plate  LIU.  Figurines.  Chafter  X 

(1) .  (2039).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  3.75  hi.  Hollow  body  with  walls  averaging  0.35  th.  Open  base. 

Found  with  jar-stand  in  PI.  XXVI,  10.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  216,  lev.  + 11.2  ft. 

(2) .  C4070).  Pot.  3.1  hi.  Hollow  body  & base;  the  roughly  oval  hole  in  the  latter  measuring 

0.75  X 0-63  ins.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  -j-  7.9  ft. 

C3).  (1602).  Pot.  2.6  hi.  Hollow  body  and  base;  hole  in  latter  measuring  0.24  di.  Sq.  7/E,  loc. 
121,  lev.  -f-  13.5  ft. 

(4) -  (3585).  Pot.  2.4  hi.  Hollow  body  and  open  base.  No  legs  unless  they  were  attached  to 

two  breaks  in  front,  in  which  case  it  would  have  been  a seated  figure.  Trench  E(i), 
loc.  38,  lev.  — 4.8  ft. 

(5) .  (3584).  Pot.,  rd.  sip.  1.7  hi.  Hole  for  peg  in  base,  0.12  in  di.  Scarf  round  neck  broken 

away  with  head,  ends  showing.  Trench  E(i),  lev.  — -4.8  ft. 

(6) .  (3190).  Pot,  rd.  sip.  2.18  hi.  Arms  and  lower  part  of  body  missing.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  280, 

lev.  +7.1  ft. 

(7) .  (2423).  Pot.  3.53  hi.  Hollow  body  & open  base;  hole  in  latter  0.7  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  118, 

lev.  + 9-8  ft. 

(8) .  (2257).  Pot.  4.24  hi.  Nostrils  indicated  by  holes.  Solid  body.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  314,  lev. 

4-  10.8  ft. 

(9) .  (3706)-  Pot,  rd.  sip.  1. 21  hi.  Solid.  Vertical  hole  running  down  from  back  of  shoulders. 

Trench  BC5),  lev.  — 1.7  ft. 

(10) .  (621).  Pot.  rd.  sip.  2.39  hi.  Solid.  Vertical  hole  at  back,  o.i  di.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  56; 

lev.  — 4.8  ft. 

(11) .  (2427).  Pot  1.75  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  238,  lev.  + 1 0-4  E. 


294 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(iz).  C3347).  Pot,  cr.  sip.  2.82  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev. -f- 9-2  ft 

(13).  (2527).  Pot  3.97  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  + lo.i  ft 


Plate  LIV.  Figurines.  Chapter  X 

(i).  (3201).  Pot.  2.61  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  440,  lev.  + 7.6  ft. 

C2).  (2683).  Pot.  2.42  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev.  + lo-o  ft. 

(3) .  (3186).  Pot.  2.37  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  280,  lev.  + 7-0  ft. 

(4) .  (3454).  Pot  1.7  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  324,  lev.  + 7-5  ft. 

(5) .  C3205).  Pot  2.9  hi.  Solid.  Hole  in  base  to  set  figure  on  pin.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev 

+ 7.0  ft. 

(6) .  (3334).  Pot.  3.48  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  164,  lev.  + 6.9  ft 

(7) .  (465).  Pot.  3.39  hi.  Solid.  Trench  0(3),  lev. — 7.9  ft. 

(8) .  (3418).  Pot.  2.63  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  lo/C,  loc.  381,  lev.  + 6-8  ft. 

(9/.  (4069/.  Pot.  2.62  hi.  Solid.  Vertical  hole  in  base,  0.09  di.;  0.52  dp.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  445 
lev.  6.7  ft. 

(10) .  C3366).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  2.6  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  331,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(11) .  (3739).  Pot  2.9  hi.  Solid.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  240,  lev.  + 7.0  ft 

(12) .  (3619).  Pot.  2.8  hi.  Solid.  Trench  FC I ),  lev. — 4.1ft. 


Plate  LV.  Model  Animals.  Cha-pter  X 

(1) .  (3743).  Pot  2.52hi.  Trench  K(  I ),  lev.  — 4.4ft. 

(2) .  C487).  Pot  2.99  Ig.  Trench  8(5),  lev. — 0.7  ft. 

(3) .  (337).  Pot.  rd.  sip.  hi.  pt  4.47  Ig.  Trench  8(5),  lev.  — 4.2  ft 

(4) .  (3839).  Pot.  1.9  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  + 2.3  ft. 

(5) -  (3957)-  Pot  2.71  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  378,  lev.  + 5.3  ft. 

(6) -  (533)-  Pot.  cr.  sip.  rd.  pt  2.2  Ig.  Trench  8(3),  lev.  — 7.7  ft 

(7) .  (2721).  Pot.  2.23  Ig.  Sq.  6/C,  loc.  266,  lev.  + 9.0  ft. 

(8) .  (3513)-  Pot  5.4  Ig.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  319,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(9) -  (3838)-  Pot.,  rd.  sip.  2.03  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  + 2.3  ft. 

(lo).  (952).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  2.4  Ig.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  79,  lev.  — 0.5  ft. 

(it)-  (4718).  Pot  1.83  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 0.6  ft 

(12) .  (4175).  Pot,  rd.  sip.  2.2  Ig.  Cut,  sq.  I o/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  + 0.2  ft 

(13) -  C3852.).  Pot  2.23  Ig.  Trench  8(5),  loc.  43,  lev.  — 10.2  ft 

(14) -  (3120)-  Pot,  rd.  sip.  2.3  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  -f  6.4  ft. 

(15) -  (1971)-  Pot  2.83  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  + 10.7  ft. 


Plate  LVI.  Model  Animals.  Chapter  X 

(1) .  (2583).  Pot.  2.87  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev. -f- 9-4  ft. 

(2) .  (2658).  Pot.  2.5  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 

(3) -  (4^52')-  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  2.6  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 7-o  ft. 

(4) -  (1418).  Pot,  cr.  sip.  2.51  Ig.  Trench  G( I ),  loc.  67,  lev.  — 6.1ft 

(5) .  (882).  Pot.  1.9  Ig.  rd.  pt.  Trench  C(i),  loc.  50,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(6) .  (883).  Pot.  2.79  Ig.  rd.  pt  Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 3.4  ft 

(7) -  (3989)-  Pot.  1.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  259,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(8) .  C2701).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  3.72  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  + 10.2  ft. 

C9)-  (3483)-  Pot.  rd.  pt.  4.72  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  196,  lev.  10. i ft. 

Cio).  (2652).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  rd.  pt.  2.58  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  315,  lev.  -j-  9.3  ft. 

(ii).  (3234)-  Pot,  rd.  sip.  3.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  + 6.9  ft 
C12).  (3781).  Pot.  2.9  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  289,  lev.  4- 7-4  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


295 


Plate  LVIl.  Model  Animals.  Cha^pter  X. 

(1) .  (948).  Wh.  pas.  1.88  Ig.  Trench  JCi)>  loc.  79,  lev.  4-  0.5  ft. 

(2) .  (2396).  Pot.  1.37  Ig.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev.  + 9-9  ft- 

(3) .  (2892).  Pot.  rd.  pt.  2.65  Ig.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  295,  lev.  4-  9.4  ft. 

(4) .  (2020).  Wh.  pas.  gl.  nil.  1.29  hi.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  204,  lev.  4-  12.9  ft. 

(5) -  (502.7).  Pot.  3.03  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(6) .  (1402).  Pot.  3.1  Ig.  Trench  GCi),  loc.  47,  lev.  — 6.1  ft. 

(7) .  (3804).  Pot.rd.pt.  3.2  Ig.  Trench  A/3,  lev. — 7.8  ft. 

(8) .  (889).  Pot.,  pnk.  sip.  3.3  Ig.  Trench  KO).  loc.  77,  lev.  — 1.5  ft. 

(9) .  (1276).  Pot.rd.pt.  3.1  Ig.  Trench  EC  1),  lev. — 3.2ft. 

(10) .  (1912).  Pot.,  yel.  sip.  rd  pt.  2.36  hi.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  4"  14.6  ft. 

(11) .  (3204).  Pot.  rd.  pt.  2.91  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  toi,  lev.  4-  7.6ft. 

(12) .  (757).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  3.8  Ig.  Trench  AC3),  loc.  40,  lev.  — 6.7  ft. 

(13) .  C4929).  Pot.  2.6  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  17,  lev.  4*  14-3  ft. 

(14) .  C1912).  As  No.  I o. 

(15) .  (5395).  Pot.  3.9  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — 12.5  ft. 

Plate  LVlll.  Toys  and  Playthings.  Chapter  XI 

(i,  la).  (2463).  Model  cart.  Br.  2.93  Ig.  X 1.2  wde.  X J.73lii.  End  bent  upwards  and  small 
portions  missing.  Wheels,  one  with  the  axle,  revolved  inside  two  eyelets  cast  with  the 
framework.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  loi,  lev.  4-  9.7  ft. 

(2) .  (2291).  Model  cart.  Br.  2.4  pres.  hi.  X i.i  wde.  X 1.7  Ig.  Holes  for  axle,  0.14  di. 

Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  4-  10.3  ft. 

(3) .  C3802).  Model  cart-wheel.  Pot.  no.  sip.  3.3  di.  X 0.52  th.  at  hub;  0.3  th.  at  rim.  Hole 

0.22  di.  and  acentric.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  44,  lev.  — 10.2  ft. 

(4) .  C4990).  Model  cart-frame.  Pot.  no  sip.  2.92  Ig.  X 1.9  wde.  Pair  of  holes  on  each  side  of 

lower  surface  for  axle-pins.  Hole  at  end  to  take  shaft.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  4-  0.9  ft. 

(5) .  C5008).  Model  cart.  Pot.  no  sip.  3.0  Ig.  X t.6  wde.  X t.2. hi.  with  peak.  Practically 

complete,  except  for  small  portion  at  end.  Hole  for  axle,  0.13  di.,  hole  for  shaft  0.13  di. 
Reverse  slightly  hollow.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  4-  6.6  ft. 

(6) .  C3708).  Model  cart.  Pot.  no  sip.  Turned  up  tip  missing  and  part  gone  at  the  right  end 

in  photograph.  Axle-hole  0.12  di.,  shaft  hole  smaller.  Concave  base  roughly  finished. 
Trench  B(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — 1.7  ft. 

(7) .  (1206).  Model  draught-ox.  Pot.  no  sip.  3.98  Ig.  Each  pair  of  legs  joined  together.  Hole 

through  neck  for  yoke,  o.i  i di.  Trench  H(i),  loc.  52,  lev.  — 4.1  ft. 

(8) .  (3568).  Model  draught-ox.  Pot.  rd.  sip.  2.83  Ig.  Legs  joined  in  pairs.  Eyes,  round  discs 

of  clay  with  slightly  oblique  incisions  for  pupils;  mouth  a gash;  two  indentations  for 

nostrils.  Dewlap  barely  indicated.  Hole  to  take  yoke,  0.16  di.  Trench  C(3),  lev, 

— 7.9  ft. 

(9) .  (5159)-  Model  four-wheeled  cart  or  chariot.  Pot.  no  sip.  5.0  Ig.  X 2.53  wde.  X 3-i9hi. 

Roughly  made.  Holes  0.18  di.  to  take  two  pairs  of  wheels,  one  pair  larger  than  the  other. 
Part  of  canopy  in  front  missing.  Cut.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 0.6  ft. 

(10) .  (723).  Model  cart.  Pot.  no  sip.  4.12  Ig.  X 2.21  wde.  X 1-28  hi.  Hollowed-out  base.  Por- 

tion missing  from  tail  and  from  upper  portion  close  to  shaft-hole.  Trench  DCi),  lev. 

— 4.1  ft. 

(11) .  (2937).  Model  ram.  Pot.  no  sip.  4.3  Ig.  X 3-2.8  hi.  Fleece  roughly  represented  by  crossed 

dk.  rd.  lines.  Hole  for  axle  0.38  di.  Round  pellets  for  eyes  with  incision  in  centre. 
Mouth  mere  cut;  two  holes  for  nostrils.  Homs  only  just  recognizable.  Hollow  body, 
triangular  in  section.  No  tail  and  flat  hind-quarters.  Wheels  not  found  with  this  animal. 
Sq.  8/D,  loc.  288,  lev.  4-  8.7  ft. 

(12) .  (4134).  Model  ram.  Pot.  no  sip.  5.13  Ig.  X 3-0  hi.  Hollow  body,  somewhat  triangular  in 

section.  Fleece  represented  by  cross  lines  of  It.  rd.  pt.  Homs  reddened,  and  some  of  this 


296 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


colour  on  muzzle.  Eyes,  oval  pellets  with  prickings  in  centres.  Nostrils,  shallow  holes; 
mouth  a slight  cut.  Part  of  one  horn  missing.  No  trace  of  tail.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  267,  lev. 
+ 7.2  ft. 

(13) .  (4533).  Model  cart  or  chariot  body.  Pot.  no  sip.  6.1  Ig.  X 2.8  wde.  X 2.7  hi.  Middle  of 

sides,  1.46  hi.  Two  small  holes  each  side  for  axles,  o.ii  di.  Flat,  even  base.  Sq.  7/E,  loc. 
1 21,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(14) .  (5204).  Model  cart.  Pot.  no  sip.  z.plg.  X 1.92  wde.  X 0.83  hi.  Two  compartments.  Two 

holes  for  axle-pins  on  each  side  of  partition.  Over-baked,  blistered  and  distorted  on  one 
side.  Cut.  Sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 6.9  ft. 

(15) .  (3301).  Model  ram.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  5.12  Ig.  X 2.62  hi.  Hollow  body.  Round  pellets  for 

eyes.  Slight  cut  for  mouth.  Narrow,  It.  rd.  lines  cover  body  vertically  and  horizontally, 
forming  a series  of  squares.  Axle-hole,  0.3  di.  No  hole  for  draw-cord.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  443, 
lev.  -J-  6.7  ft. 

(16) .  (4271).  Model  ram’s  head.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.37  hi.  Red.  markings  on  tightly  curled  horns 

and  tip  of  muzzle.  Crossed  red  lines  on  breast  and  round  neck.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  271,  lev. 
+ 6.8  ft. 

(17) .  (3714).  Model  animal.  Pot.  no  sip.  4.4  Ig.  Minute  round  pellets  for  eyes.  Traces  of  horn 

in  middle  of  forehead.  Narrow,  vertical  cuts  for  insertion  of  ears.  Legs  joined  in  pairs, 
with  axle-holes,  0.17  di.  Small  lateral  hole  through  neck  for  string.  Ornamented  with 
dk.  rd.  pt.  Trench  F(2),  lev.  — 3.6  ft. 

C18).  (5282).  Frag,  cart-frame.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  Now  3.4  Ig.  X 2.98  wde.  X 0.62  th.  Upper  surface 
ornamented  with  dk.  rd.  lines  to  imitate  netting.  Cut.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 

(19) .  (1000).  Model  cart.  Pot.  Pnk.  sip.  4.2  Ig.  X 3-i  wde.  X 1.9  hi.  Walls  average  0.2  th.  and 

1 .4  dp.  inside.  Drilled  holes  for  shaft  and  axle-pins.  Base  flat  and  covered  with  thick 
deposit  of  sand  and  mica.  Toy  has  been  much  played  with;  sides  scraped  by  the  wheels 
found  with  this  cart  which  average  2.0  di  X 0.36  th.  Lt.  rd.  lines  on  body  to  imitate 
wickerwork  or  netting.  Trench  A(3),  lev.  — 3.8  ft. 

(20) .  (2723).  Wheel.  Pot.  no  sip.  4.49  di.  X 0.8  th.  including  hub.  Hole  0.3  di.,  tyre  0.24  th. 

Broad  hand  of  dk.  rd.  pt.,  2.3  wde.  on  each  side  to  indicate  that  a wheel  of  three  pieces 
of  wood  is  meant.  Obverse  has  hub,  1.45  di.,  projecting  0.28  inch.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  154, 
lev.  + 9-5  ft- 

(21) .  (2318).  Model  cart-frame.  Pot.  no  sip.  7.1  Ig.  X 3-32  wde.  X 0.85  th.  Ends  slightly 

curved  upwards.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  98,  lev.  + 12.1  ft. 

C22).  (591,  859,  1429,  1880;  see  also  No.  26).  Model  cart  drawn  by  oxen.  Frame,  pot,  no  sip. 
2-9  Ig-  X 1-9  wde.  X 0.6  th.  Wheels  average  2.05  di  X 0.45  th.  Bulls  average  3.08  Ig. 
One  bears  traces  of  a rd.  wash,  other  coated  with  a cr.  sip.  Trench  E(  i ),  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 
Trench  G(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — 8.0  ft. 

C23)-  (5059)-  Wheel.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.92  di.  X 0.8  th.  Both  faces  convex.  Shows  signs  of  paring 
with  sharp  instrument.  Axle-hole,  0.2  di.,  very  askew.  Mound  I.  Sq.  12/J,  loc.  14, 
lev.  -j-  14. 1 ft. 

C24)-  (1062).  Wheel.  Pot.  no  sip.  2.5  di.  X 0.31  th.  Axle-hole  0.22  di.  Both  sides  coated  with 
thick  deposit  of  sand  and  mica.  Edges  worn  by  friction  against  frame  of  cart  or  chariot. 
Trench  A(3),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

C25).  (607,  1005,  1028).  Model  cart  and  wheels.  Cart,  pot.  pnk.  sip.  7.6  Ig.  X 3-83  wde. 

X 0.86  th.  Trench  C(2),  lev.  — 5.0  ft.  Wheels,  pot.  no  sip.  Average  3.01  di.  Sides 
thickly  coated  with  sand  and  mica.  Trenches  A(3),  F(i),  levels  — 3-7  ft. 

(26).  (591).  Model  cart.  Pot.  no  sip.  Same  as  No.  22. 

Plate  LIX.  Toys  and  Playthings.  Cha'pter  XL 

(i).  (1013).  Model  bull.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  3.5  Ig.  without  head.  Two  perforated  flanges  in  front  of 
shoulders  to  take  head.  Hole  through  shoulders,  hump  and  rump  for  cord  or  fibre  to  move 
head.  Trench  A(4),  loc.  67,  lev.  — 6.1ft.  Head,  not  found  with  body.  Pot.  no  sip. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  297 

1.38  Ig.  Hole  at  back  of  head  to  swing  on  pin  and  a second  through  mouth  and  forehead 
for  pull-string.  Trench  A(4),  loc.  67,  lev.  — 6.1  ft. 

C2.).  (3303)-  Toy  with  movable  arms.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  3.07  hi.  Hole  for  missing  arms  o.iidi. 

Remains  of  dk.  rd.  hand  round  neck.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  300,  lev.  + 7.6  ft. 

(3) .  C4352,  3509,  1127,  from  left).  Balls.  Ch.  lim.  No.  4352  1.38  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  294, 

lev.  +7.2  ft.  No.  3509  1.3  di.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  273,  lev.  + 8.1  ft.  No.  1127  1.4  di. 
Trench  A(2),  loc.  81,  lev.  — 8.9  ft. 

(4) .  (1219).  Ball.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.02  di.  Pricked  over  with  small  holes.  Trench  A(4),  loc. 

67,  lev.  — 0.7  ft, 

(5) -  (467)-  Whistle.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.71  hi.  Concave  base  to  pedestal.  Trench  C(3),  loc.  26, 

lev.  — 1 2. 1 ft. 

(6) .  (1970).  Whistle.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.46 hi.  Lt.  rd.  markings.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 18,  lev.  + i i.i  ft. 

C?)-  (1008).  Rattle  (see  PI.  LXI,  i).  Pot.  no  sip.  1.43  di.  Decorated  with  rd.  pt.  Trench 

A(3),  lev.  — 3.6  ft. 

(8) .  (1599).  Rattle  (see  PI.  LXI,  4).  Pot.  no.  sip.  1. 8 1 di.  Decorated  with  dk.  rd.  lines. 

Sq.  8/F,  loc.  149,  lev.  -j-  1 1. oft. 

(9) .  (1074).  Rattle.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  1.91  di.  Decorated  with  dk.  rd.  lines.  Found  with  No.  7 in 

PI.  LXI.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 7.2  ft. 

(10).  (1074).  Rattle  (see  PI.  LXI,  7).  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.2  di.  Dk.  rd.  lines.  Found  with  No.  9. 
(n).  (Upper  register  from  left,  870,  615,  724).  No.  870.  Pellet.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.09  di.  Decorated 
with  rd.  spots.  Trench  A(i),  lev.  — 3.8  ft.  No.  615.  Pellet.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  i.mdi. 
Irregular  rd.  spots.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 6.9  ft.  No.  724.  Pellet.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  i.oi  di. 
Decorated  with  rd.  spots.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 4.6  ft. 

(12) .  (3724).  Pellet.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.4  di.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 7.6  ft. 

(13) -  (502.0).  Pellet.  Fai.  i.i  di.  Decorated  with  incised  circles.  Cut.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  408, 

lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(14) .  (2556).  Ball.  Sh.  1.2  di.  Incised  concentric  circles.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(15) .  (2050).  Ball.  Sh.  1.3  di.  Incised  concentric  circles.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  4- 12.8  ft. 

(16) .  (4916).  Ball.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.51  di.  Irregular  in  shape.  Impressed  with  thumb  nail.  Cut. 

Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev.  +0.1  ft. 

(17) .  (2030).  Ball.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.78  di.  Impressed  with  thumb  nail.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev. 

+ 12.7  ft. 

(18) .  (4355).  Whistle.  Dr.  pot  no  sip.  1.71  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  170,  lev.  -f  7.3  ft. 

(19) .  (4680).  Whistle.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.81  hi.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  + 7.2  ft. 

(20) .  (4646).  Whistle.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.82  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  389,  lev. -f  6.7  ft. 

(21) -  (1780).  Draughtsman.  Pot.  rd.  sip.  0.82  di.  X 0.18  th.  Base  coated  with  thick  deposit  of 

sand  and  mica.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + 10.8  ft. 

(22) .  (95).  Draughtsman.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.21  di.  X 0.35  th.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 5.1ft. 

(23) .  (1735)-  Ball.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  Fragment  measuring  2.1  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  106,  lev.  + i6.6ft. 

(24) .  (4916).  Ball.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.9  di.  Found  with  No.  16.  Cut.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev. 

0,1  ft. 

(25) .  (784).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.55  across.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 4.4  ft. 

(26) .  (1334).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.5  each  way.  Trench  K(i),  loc.  77,  lev. — 3-4  ft. 

(27) .  (1181).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.3  X i-i8  X 0.41.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 14.1  ft. 

(28) .  (783).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.55  across  each  way.  Trench  6(5),  lev. — 4.4  ft. 

(29) .  (978).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.6 1 each  way.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 2.9  ft. 

(30) .  (1324).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.62  each  way.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  31,  lev. — 5.2  ft. 

(31) .  (1481).  Draughtsman.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.3  X 1.19  X 0.41  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  + 14.1  ft. 

(32) .  (1450).  Draughtsman.  Dr.  pot;  no  sip.  i.i  X 1.08  X 0.57  ins.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev. 

+ 18.8  ft. 

(33) -  (1535)-  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1.2  hi.  X 0.7  di.  Slightly  rounded  ends  and  does 

not  stand  well.  Pierced  by  vertical  hole.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 16.5  ft. 

(34) .  (1548).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  0.96  H X 0-52  di.  Both  ends  rounded  and  will  not 

stand.  No  hole.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  loi,  lev.  16.2  ft. 


298 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(35) .  (1551).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  0.61  hi.  X 0.4  di.  One  end  rounded,  stands  with 

difficulty  on  other.  Pierced  by  oblique  hole.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 16.1  ft. 

(36) .  (3919).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  i.i  hi.  X 0.6  di.  Both  ends  fairly  flat.  Pierced  by 

vertical  hole.  Cut.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  424,  lev.  + ft- 
C37).  (2004).  Knuckle-bone.  1.28  Ig.  Shows  polish  of  much  use.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  187,  lev. 
+ 12.8  ft. 

(38) .  C773).  Draughtsman.  Pot.  Gr.  sip.  1.73  di.  X o-3  th.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 4-7  ft. 

(39) .  (1197).  Draughtsman.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.83  di.  X 0-56  th.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  41,  lev. 

— 5.1  ft. 

(40) .  (1292).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1.5  hi.  X 0.8  di.  One  end  rounded,  other  flat. 

Pierced  by  oblique  hole.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  83,  lev.  17.9  ft. 

C41).  (2095).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1.4  hi.  X 0.9  di.  One  end  flat,  other  rounded. 

Pierced  by  vertical  hole.  Trench  I(i),  lev.  — 2.1  ft. 

C42).  (1638).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1-35  Ig-X  i.odi.  Oval  in  section,  both  ends 
concave.  Pierced  by  vertical  hole.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  142,  lev.  -j-  14.7  ft. 

(43).  C2070).  Knuckle-bone.  0.91  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 21.0  ft. 

Plate  LX.  Toys  and  Playthings.  Chapter  XI 

(1) .  C5307).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  i.o  hi.  X 0.9  di.  Mound  I.  Sq.  13/K,  loc.  67,  lev. 

+ 13-0  ft- 

(2) .  C5435)-  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  1.03  di.  X 0-67  th.  Edges  well  rounded.  Cut.  Sq.  lo/G, 

loc.  481,  lev.  — 23.8  ft. 

(3) -  (3694).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  i.ii  di.  X o-3  th.  Top  convex;  base  concave.  Sq.  8/C, 

loc.  308,  lev.  -f-  7.5  ft. 

(4) .  (5024).  Gamesman.  Sh.  0.59  X o-5  X 0-22  ins.  Cut.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev. — 4-9  ft- 

(5) .  (2573).  Gamesman.  Cr.  col.  ch.  lim.  0.92  hi.  X 0.45  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  170,  lev.  10.3  ft. 

(6) .  (3871).  Gamesman.  Pot.  no  sip.  0.68  each  way.  Trench  HCi),  loc.  51,  lev.  — 8.1  ft. 

(7) .  (2326,1).  Gamesman.  Fai.  It.  blu.  i.o  each  way.  Carefully  made  with  acute  edges  and 

slightly  rounded  points.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.3  ft. 

(8) .  (2177).  Gamesman.  Fai.  cr.  col.  1.5  hi.  X i.i5di.  Well  made  with  flat  top  and  base. 

Sq.  8/D,  loc.  217,  lev.  -j-  12.0  ft. 

(9) .  (4430).  Gamesman.  Hrd.  bl.  st.  0.82  hi.  X 0.63  di.  Mound  I.  Sq.  12/J,  loc.  14,  lev. 

+ 14. 1 ft. 

(10) .  (2400).  Gamesman.  Fai.  Cr.  col.  0.42  hi.  X 0.4  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  285,  lev.  -f-  9.6  ft. 

(11) .  (2419).  Gamesman.  Fai.  Lt.  gr.  0.61  hi.  Depression  0.22  di.  on  top  for  inlay.  Sq.  9/D, 

loc.  287,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(12) .  (275).  Die.  Iv.  Now  1.8  Ig.  X 0.32  X 0.27.  One  end  missing.  Trench  BCj),  lev.  + 0.3  ft. 

(13) .  (4707).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1.0  Ig.  X 0.5  di.  Oblique  hole.  Cut.  Sq.  lo/F, 

loc.  464,  lev.  - — • 1.5  ft. 

(14) .  (4212).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  0.92  hi.  X 0-76  di.  Pierced  by  vertical  hole.  Cut. 

Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  o.i  ft. 

(15) .  (4174).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Pnk.  pot.  0.84  hi.  X 0-6  di.  Pierced  by  oblique  hole.  Cut. 

Sq.  lo/G,  loc.  482,  lev.  -j-  0.3  ft. 

(16) .  (2670).  Die.  Iv.  drk.  br.  Now  2.3  Ig.  X o-3  X 0.3.  One  end  missing.  Partially  burnt. 

Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  359,  lev.  +7.1  ft. 

(17) .  (4154).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Pnk.  pot.  1.7  hi.  X 0-92  di.  Pierced  half-way  with  vertical 

hole.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  185,  lev.  + 9.  8 ft. 

(18) .  (5041).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Dr.  pot.  1.4 hi.  X i-odi.  Pierced  by  vertical  hole.  Cut. 

Sq.  lo/G,  loc.  482,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(19) .  (1281).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Gr.  pot.  1.49  hi.  X 0.8  di.  Pierced  by  oblique  hole.  Sq. 

8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  d-  21.8  ft. 

(20) .  (1345).  Bobbin  or  gamesman.  Dr.  pot.  1.2  hi.  X 0.7  di.  Narrow  hole  at  one  end.  Sq. 

8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 19.0  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  299 

(21) .  C3795)'  Cone.  Pot.  drk.  br.  sip.  Now  i .62  hi.  X i -3  di.  Two  grooves  round  lower  portion. 

Trench  A(4),  loc.  67,  lev.  — 6.1  ft. 

(22) .  (806).  Cone.  Pot.  purp.  bl.  sip.  over  a rd.  sip.  Now  1.5  hi.  X 1.2  di.  Conical  hole  in  base. 

Spiral  grooving  round  fower  portion.  Trench  6(5),  lev.  — 3.9  ft. 

(^3)-  (3707)-  Cone.  Pot.  drk.  rd.  sip.  Now  2.53  hi.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(24) '  C32’62,  b).  Cone.  Sh.  Now  1.92  hi.  Found  with  No.  30.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(25) .  (1178).  Cone.  Pot.  red  sip.  2.26  hi.  Hard-baked,  surface  smooth  and  almost  polished. 

Trench  I(i),  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 

(26) .  (4520).  Cone.  Pot.  cr.  sip.  2.51  hi.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  258,  lev.  -)-  8.6  ft. 

(27) .  (3461).  Cone.  Pot.  2.13  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  283,  lev.  + 6.8  ft.' 

(28) .  (1395).  Cone.  Gre.  pot.  Hard  baked.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  -f-  19.1  ft. 

(29) .  (1157).  Cone.  Pot.  2.5  hi.  Point  re-trimmed.  Trench  D(i),  lev. — 2.1ft. 

(30) -  (32.62,  a).  Cone.  Sh.  2.93  hi.  Incised  pattern  round  base.  Found  with  No.  24.  Sq.  7/E, 

loc.  1 21,  lev.  6.9  ft. 

(30-  (3533)-  Cone.  Sh.  3.7  hi.  Incised  decoration  at  base.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  7.0  ft. 
C32.)-  (5242).  Cone.  Pot.  3.1  hi.  Semi-rounded  base  with  remains  of  white  substance  inset. 

Signs  of  accidental  burning.  Mound  I.  Sq.  13/},  loc.  3,  lev.  14.3  ft. 

(33)-  (3933)-  Cone.  Dr.  pot.  2.7  hi.  Hard  baked.  Four  lines  of  pricking  at  base.  Trench  EC i), 
loc.  38,  lev.  — 3.8  ft. 

C34).  (371 5T  Cone.  Pot.  2.6  hi.  Decorated  with  five  roughly  painted  broad,  red  bands.  Red 
paint  on  base.  Trench  FC2),  lev.  — 3.6  ft. 

(35).  (3414).  Cone.  Pot.  2.7  hi.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  302,  lev.  + 7-7  ft- 

C36).  (2401).  Cone.  Sh.  3.61  hi.  Has  been  burnt  and  is  now  a black  colour.  Sq.  9/D,  loc. 

215,  lev.  -f-  9-3  ft. 

(37).  (1928).  Cone.  Sh.  2.79  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev. -p  1 4-3  ft- 
C38).  (1190).  Cone.  Pot.  Drk.  gr.  sip.  2.42  hi.  Trench  C( 3),  lev. — 4.0  ft. 

(39).  (1354).  Cone.  Pot.  Now  2.4  hi.  Semi-polished  surface,  decorated  with  thin  lines  of  light 
red.  Trench  J(Oj  loc.  73,  lev.  — 7.8  ft. 

Plate  LXI.  Toys  and  Playthings.  Chayiter  XI 

(1) .  (1008).  Rattle.  See  also  PI.  LIX,  7. 

(2) .  (4300).  Rattle.  Pot.  Approx.  1.65  di.  Light  red  lines  arranged  about  four  poles.  Sq. 

7/C,  loc.  267,  lev.  -f  7.2  ft. 

(3) .  (4978).  Rattle.  Pot.  Approx.  1.51  di.  Light  red  lines  arranged  about  two  poles  not 

opposite.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  395,  lev.  4-  7-3  ft- 

(4) .  (1599).  Ratde.  See  also  PI.  LIX,  8. 

(5) .  C5065).  Ratde.  Pot.  Approx.  2.02  di.  Divided  into  four  quarters  by  two  thick,  dark  red 

lines.  Mound  I.  Sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev.  + 14.2ft. 

(6) .  C4737).  Rattle.  Pot.  Approx.  2.1  di.  Light  red  lines  arranged  about  four  poles.  Cut. 

Sq  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  4 3.1  ft. 

(7) .  (1074).  Rattle.  See  also  PI.  LIX,  10. 

Plate  LXII.  Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2529).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2529,  V).  Jar.  3.03  hi.  X 2.28  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  4 io-4  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  2529,  W).  Scale-pan.  0.17  hi.  X ti.23  di. 

(3) .  (No.  2529,  S).  Scale-pan.  0.27  hi.  X 2.2  di. 

(4) .  (No.  2529,  R).  Scale-pan.  0.32  hi.  X 2.24  di. 

(5) .  (No.  2529,  X).  Bangle.  2.0  di.  X 0.2,  X 0.2  in  sect. 

(6) .  (No.  2529,  X).  Bangle.  1.85  di.  X o-n  X 0.2  in  sect. 

(7) .  (No.  2529,  Y).  Tube-drill.  1.6  Ig.  0.21-0.35  di. 

(8) .  (No.  2529,  AA).  Scale-pan.  0.25  hi.  X 2.26  di. 

(9) .  (No.  2529,  D).  Awl.  3.43  Ig.  X 0.2  di. 


300 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(10) .  (No.  2529,  P).  Scale-pan.  0.2  hi.  X 2.22  di. 

(11) .  (No.  2529,  H).  Knife.  3.61  Ig.  X 1.28  wde.  X o.ii  th. 

(12) .  (No.  2529,  C).  Chisel.  6.58  Ig.  X o-88  wde.  X 0.45  th. 

(13) .  (No.  2529,  Q).  Chisel.  5.92  Ig.  X 0.33  wde.  X o-9  th. 

(14) .  (No.  2529,  K).  Awl.  5.2  Ig.  X 0.22  sq. 

(15) .  (No.  2529,  A).  Chisel.  2.31  Ig.  X 0.52  wde.  X o-3  th. 

(16) .  (No.  2529,  L).  Knife.  1.95  wde.  X 0.12  th. 

(17) .  (No.  2529,  HH).  Knife.  5.92  Ig.  X 1.82  wde.  X 0.12  th. 

(18) .  (No.  2529,  B).  Chisel.  3.24  Ig.  X 0.73  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

(19) .  (No.  2529,  L).  Chisel.  5.91  Ig.  X 0.42  wde.  X 0.13  th. 

(20) .  (No.  2529,  F).  Port,  of  axe.  5.35  Ig.  X 2.10  wde.  X 0.18  th. 

(21) .  (No.  2529,  GG).  Adze.  8.11  Ig.  X 1-83  wde.  X 0.20  th. 

(22) .  (No.  2529,  BB).  Port,  of  axe.  5.85  Ig.  X 3-7  wde.  X 0-46  th. 

(23) .  (No.  2529,  E).  Adze.  8.13  Ig.  X 1.54  wde.  X 0.16  th. 

Plate  LXUl.  Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2529,  2525,  2384).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2529,  DD).  Saw.  10.73  X 3-53  wde.  X 0.14  th. 

(2) .  (No.  2529,  U).  Spear-head.  9.22  Ig.  X 3.15  wde.  X 0.14  th. 

(3) -  (No.  2529,  G).  Axe.  8.0  Ig.  X 3-25  wde.  X 0.32  th. 

(4) .  (No.  2529,  HH).  Spear-head.  10.55  X 3-05  wde.  X 0.12  th. 

(5) '  (No.  2529,  J).  Spear-head.  10.93  ^E-  X ^..8  wde.  X 0.05  th. 

(6) .  (No.  2525,  A).  Chisel.  5.25  Ig.  X 0.83  wde.  X o.i  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2525,  E).  Chisel.  4.3  Ig.  X 0.3  wde.  X 0.28  th. 

(8) .  (No.  2525,  D).  Chisel.  3.2  Ig.  X 0.5  wde.  X 0.22  th. 

(9) .  (No.  2525,  F).  Scale-pan.  0.14  hi.  X 2.85  di. 

(10) .  (No.  2525,  C).  Knife.  2.61  Ig.  X 0.7  wde.  X 0.3  th. 

(11) .  (No.  2525,  G).  Scale-beam.  3.95  Ig.  X 0.2  di. 

(12) .  (No.  2384,  D).  Chisel.  7.13  Ig.  X o-37  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.3  ft 

(13) .  (No.  2384,  B).  Scale-pan.  0.15  hi.  X th- 

(14) .  (No.  2384,  F).  Knife.  3.8  Ig.  X 0.83  wde.  X 0.2  th. 

Plate  LXIV.  Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2593).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2593,  W).  Knife.  8.62  Ig.  X 2.72  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2593,  FF).  Knife.  8.96  Ig.  X 2.86  wde. 

(3) .  (No.  2593,  Z).  Knife.  9.2  Ig.  X 2.6  wde.  X 0.19  th. 

(4) ,  (No.  2593,  FF).  Knife.  lo.o  Ig.  X 2.39  wde. 

(5) -  (No.  2593,  V).  Knife.  8.69  Ig.  X i.8  wde.  X o.ii  th. 

(6) ,  (No.  2593,  GG).  Knife.  6.33  Ig.  X 2.5  wde.  X o-i  th. 

(7) .  (No.  2593,  BB).  Port,  of  knife.  7.2  Ig.  X o-4  wde. 

(8) .  (No.  2593,  N).  Adze.  6.92  Ig.  X 1.8  wde.  X 0.31  th. 

(9) .  (No.  2593,  C).  Dish.  0.65  hi.  X 4-97  di. 

(10) .  (No.  2593,  P).  Adze.  3.9  1e- X 1.7  wde. 

(11) .  (No.  2593,  Q).  Adze.  4.75  Ig.  X 1.57  wde.  X 0.23  th. 

Plate  LXV.  Copper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2593).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2593,  EE).  Spear  head.  7.83  Ig.  X 3-6i  wde.  X o.ii  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev 

+ 9.1  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2593,  Y).  Knife.  10.4  Ig.  X 3-2i  wde.  X o.ii  th. 

(3) '  (No.  2593,  U).  Knife.  9.35  Ig.  X 2.5  wde.  X 0.2  th. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  301 

(4) .  (No.  2593,  X).  Knife.  9.93  Ig.  X 2,.63  wde.  X 0.15  th. 

(5) .  (No.  2593,  AA).  Knife.  8.1 1 Ig.  X 1.94  wde.  X o.i  th. 

(6) .  (No.  2593,  FF).  Knife.  7.92  Ig.  X 1.85  wde. 

(7) .  (No.  2593,  CC).  Knife.  6.88  Ig.  X i-97  wde.  X 0.08  th. 

(8) .  (No.  2593,  HH).  Knife,  4.53  Ig.  X 1.87  wde. 

(9) .  (No.  2593,  DD).  Casting.  5.7  Ig.  X i-8i  wde.  X 0.3  th. 

Plate  LXVI.  Co-p-per  and  Bronze  Grou-ps  (Nos.  2.^9^,  zi^g).  Chapter  Xll 

(1) .  (No.  2593,  F).  Handled  dish.  7.57  Ig.  X 4-92.  di.  X 0.6  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev. 

+ 9-1  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2593,  G).  Bangle.  1.63  di.  X 0.2  round  in  sect. 

(3) .  (No.  2593,  S).  Axe.  7.25  Ig.  X 3-33  wde.  X 0.43  th. 

(4) .  (No.  2593,  O).  Axe.  6.01  Ig.  X 2.4  wde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  9.1  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2593,  R).  Axe.  5.05  Ig.  X 3-4  wde. 

(6) .  (No.  2199,  M).  Jar-cover.  0.6  hi.  X 3-14  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  ■z'irj,  lev.  11.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2199,  D).  Dish.  0.3  hi.  X 2.65  di. 

(8) .  (No.  2199,  O).  Bangle.  2.06  di.  X 0-23  round  in  sect. 

(9) .  (No.  2199,  M).  Bangle.  1.87  di.  X 0-23  round  in  sect. 

(10) .  (No.  2199,  E).  Bangle.  1.81  di.  X o.t8  round  in  sect. 

(11) .  (No.  2199, G).  Bangle.  1.63  di.  X 0.18  round  in  sect. 

(12) .  (No.  2199,  C).  Scale-pan.  0.32  hi.  X 2.35  di. 

(13) .  (No.  2199,  H).  Chisel.  2.73  Ig.  X 0.39  wde.  X 0.25  th. 

(14) .  (No.  2199,  L).  Awl.  3.2  Ig.  X 0-2  di. 

(15) .  (No.  2199,  A).  Axe.  6.6  Ig.  X 3-4  wde.  X 0.26  th. 

(16) .  (No.  2199,  M).  Knife.  5.62  Ig.  X 1-62  wde.  X 0.09  th. 

(17) .  (No.  2199,  J).  Chisel.  4.55  Ig.  X 0.55  wde.  X o.i  th. 

(18) .  (No.  2199,  K).  Chisel.  4.15  Ig.  X 0.5  wde.  X o-o3  th. 

(19) .  (No.  2199,  H).  Chisel.  2.7  Ig.  X 0.42  wde. 

(20) .  (No.  2199,  F).  Chisel.  2.8  Ig.  X 0-52  wde. 

(21) .  (No.  2199,  B).  Awl.  4.91  Ig.  X o-ii  di. 

Plate  LXVII.  Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  2596,  2360,  2382).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2596,  O).  Razor.  2.61  Ig.  X i-4  wde.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  9.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2596,  F).  Scale-pan.  0.19  hi.  X 1.96  di. 

(3) .  (No.  2596,  H).  Chisel.  1. 16  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X o-3  th. 

(4) .  (No.  2596,  M).  Bangle.  1.99  di.  X o-8  X 0.12,  half-round  in  sect. 

(5) .  (No.  2596,  O).  Bangle.  1.7  di.  X 0.2  X 0.12,  half-round  in  sect. 

(6) .  (No.  2596,  L).  Chisel.  3.73  Ig.  X i-n  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

(7) .  (No.  2596,  C).  Razor.  4.1 1 Ig.  X 0.51  wde.  X 0.07  th. 

(8) .  (No.  2596, 0).  Spatula  (?)■  2.72  Ig.  X 0.49  wde.  X 0.08  th. 

(9) .  (No.  2596,  O).  Chisel.  2.23  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X o-2i  th. 

(10) .  (No.  2596,  G).  Chisel.  2.2  Ig.  X 0.8  wde.  X 0.26  th. 

(11) .  (No.  2596,  D).  Chisel.  5.53  Ig.  X 0.43  wde.  X 0.15  th. 

(12) .  (No.  2596,  N).  Knife.  8.0  Ig.  X 2.32  wde.  X 0-03  th. 

(13) .  (No.  2360,  C).  Pin.  3.83  Ig.  X O.I  I di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2360,  A).  Knife.  9.45  Ig.  X 2.62  wde.  X 0.08  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  2360,  A).  Knife.  8.4  Ig.  X 2.1  wde.  X 0.05  th. 

(16) .  (No.  2360,  E).  Knife.  7.9  Ig.  X i.8  wde. 

(17) .  (No.  2360,  G).  Pin.  3.87  Ig.  X O.I  di. 


302 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Ci8).  (No.  2360,  D).  Chisel.  4.07  Ig.  X 0.25  wde.  X o-n  th. 

(19) .  (No.  2360,  B).  Chisel.  4.31  Ig.  X 0.6  wde.  X 0.4  th. 

(20) .  (No.  2382,  B).  Knife.  9.7  Ig.  X ? X 0.02  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  + lo.i  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  2382,  A).  Axe.  6.37  Ig.  X 2.96  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

Plate  LXVIII.  Co-pper  and  Bronze  Group  (No.  2365).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2365,  B).  Jar.  6.9  hi.  X 5-9  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev.  -f  9-5  R. 

(2) .  (No.  2365,  H).  Handled-pan.  4.7  Ig.  X ^-9  wde.  X 0’54  hi. 

(3) .  (No.  2365,  A).  Jar.  7.62  hi.  X 9-5  di. 

(4) .  (No.  2365,  E).  Staff-head.  2.4  hi.  X 2..2  di. 

(5) -  (No.  2365,  D).  Staff-head.  2.4  hi.  X 2..2  di. 

(6) .  (No.  2365,  M).  Arrow-head.  1.08  Ig.  X 0.06  th. 

(7) .  (No.  2365,  C).  Staff-head.  0.67  hi.  X 0.84  di. 

(8) .  (No.  2365,  K).  Knife.  3.19  Ig.  X 0.8  wde.  X 0.05  th. 

(9) .  (No.  2365, 1).  Pin.  4.0  Ig.  X 0.15  di. 

(10) .  (No.  2365,  G).  Knife.  5.36  Ig.  X 1.72  wde.  X o.i  th. 

(11) .  (No.  2365,  Q).  Adze.  13.12  Ig.  X 1-5  wde.  X 0.29  th. 

(12) .  (No.  2365,  F).  Adze.  6.23  Ig.  X 1.64  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

(13) .  (No.  2365,  L).  Dagger  (?).  lo.o  Ig.  X 2.65  wde.  X 0-13  th. 

(14) .  (No.  2365,  P).  Frag,  of  Fillet.  3.45  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0.05  th.  (see  note  8*  in  chapter  XIII). 

(15) .  (No.  2365,  N).  Dagger  (?)•  8.62  Ig.  X 2.63  wde.  X 0-13  th. 

(16) .  (No.  2365,  L).  Knife.  8.62  Ig.  X 2.45  wde. 

Plate  LXIX.  Copper  and  Bronze  Groups  (Nos.  zzgo,  2,145,  ^’2.4).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2290,  A).  Knife.  8.42  Ig.  X 2-84  wde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.1  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2290,  B).  Knife.  9.27  Ig.  X ? X 0.17  th. 

»***»»»*» 

(3) .  (No.  3145,  A).  Handled-pan.  5.38  Ig.  X 0.51  hi.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  417,  lev.  -f  7.2  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  3145,  B).  Knife.  7.32  Ig.  X 2.16  wde. 

(5) .  (No.  1919).  Pin.  3.52  Ig.  0.09  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  179,  lev.  + 15.6  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2294,  A).  Pin.  4.58  Ig.  X 0.18  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2294,  B).  Pin.  3.95  Ig.  X 0.15  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.3  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  2193).  Pin.  4.32  Ig.  X 0.16  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 12.1  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  1859).  Pin.  4.82  Ig.  X 0.15  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  107,  lev.  + 12.6  ft. 

(10).  (No.  4381).  Pin.  4.55  Ig.  X O.oqdi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  379,  lev.  + 0.05  ft. 

(i  i).  (No.  3324,  H).  Bangle.  1.15  di.  X 0.13,  round  in  sect.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  324,  lev.  -f-  9.2  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3324,  E).  Chisel.  3.0  Ig.  X 0.72  wde.  X 0.2  th. 

(13) .  (No.  3324,  D).  Frag,  of  axe.  3.82  Ig.  X 2.0  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

(14) .  (No.  3324,  B).  Axe.  7.25  Ig.  X 3-25  wde.  X 0.32  th. 

(15) .  (No.  3324,  C).  Axe.  8.5  Ig.  X 3-3  wde.  X 0.34  th. 

Plate  LXX.  Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements.  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2465).  Chisel.  1.92  Ig.  X 0.81  wde.  X 0.21  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  292,  lev.  + 8.6  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3938).  Chisel.  1.8  Ig.  X 0.41  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  410,  lev.  + 2.1  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  339).  Chisel.  1.23  Ig.  X 0.51  wde.  X 0.27  th.  Trench  D(0,  lev.  — 1.9  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  4063).  Chisel.  0.8  Ig.  X 0.6  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  420,  lev.  -f  2.9  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


303 


(5) -  (No.  3949).  Chisel.  1.21  Ig.  X 0-63  wde.  X 0.27  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  410,  lev.  + 3-6  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2842).  Chisel.  1.83  Ig.  X o-55  wde.  X 0-42.  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  + 9-i  ft- 

(7) .  (No.  2642).  Chisel.  0.87  Ig.  X o-6i  wde.  X 0.17  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  + 8.3  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  3494).  Chisel.  4.85  Ig.  X 0.78  wde.  X o-i  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  238,  lev.  + 7-5  ft- 

(9) .  (No.  2469).  Chisel.  4.41  Ig.  X 0-19  wde.  X 0.19  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  294,  lev.  + 8.9  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  321 1).  Chisel.  5.8  Ig.  X 0.37  wde.  X 0.34  th.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  1 17,  lev.  -f-  6.9  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3152).  Chisel.  6.52  Ig.  X 0.9  wde.  X 0.4  th.  Sq.  9/G,  loc.  439,  lev.  + 7-5  ft- 

(12) .  (No.  1805).  Chisel.  5.1 1 Ig.  X 0-26  wde.  X o-t8  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev.  + 13.4  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  3149).  Chisel.  6.62  Ig.  X 0.89  wde.  X 0.29  th.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  119,  lev.  + 8.0  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  5019).  Chisel.  4.84  Ig.  X 0-72  wde.  X o-4t  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev. 

+ 13-9  ft- 

(15) .  (No.  2575).  Chisel.  5.43  Ig.  X o-h  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2287).  Rod.  5.12  Ig.  X 0.22  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -|-  10.3  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  1989).  Chisel.  5.01  Ig.  X 0.31  wde.  X 0.19  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  142,  lev.  12.5  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  4176).  Awl.  6.47  Ig.  X 0.18  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev.  -E  10.3  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1660).  Chisel.  3.9  Ig.  X 0.39  wde.  X 0.33  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  141,  lev.  + 15-oft. 

(20) .  (No.  1634).  Chisel.  2.9  Ig.  X 0.22  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  122,  lev.  15.3  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  592/.  Knife.  4.62  Ig.  X 1-4  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Trench  C(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — 3.1  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1348).  Knife.  3.55  Ig.  X i-n  wde.  X o.ii  th.  Trench  G(i),  loc.  67,  lev.  — 2.3ft. 

(23) .  (No.  2028).  Knife.  2.34  Ig.  X 0.45  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  + 13-2  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  2408).  Knife.  2.57  Ig.  X 0.67  wde.  X0.07  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -f  9.4  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  2931).  Knife.  2.95  Ig.  X 0.48  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  285,  lev.  + 8.2  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  1891).  Plumb-bob  (?)-  i-i  Ig-  X 0.61  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  173,  lev.  -f-  15.8  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  2495).  Casting.  1.04  Ig.  X 0.69  di.  X 0.08  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  + 9.9  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  1810).  Razor.  4.35  Ig.  X i-35  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  135,  lev.  13.6  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  4313).  Axe.  3.3  Ig.  X 2.35  wde.  X 0-03  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  466,  lev.  -f- 0-05  ft- 

(30) .  (No.  1994).  Axe.  4.85  Ig.  X 2.75  wde.  X 0-38  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  + 11.2  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  1803).  Lance-head.  4.13  Ig.  X i-4t  wde.  X 0-04  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  165,  lev.  + n.8  ft. 

Plate  LXXl.  Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements.  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2601).  Scale-beam.  1 1.06  Ig.  X o-47  di.  Sq.  6/E,  loc.  330,  lev.  -f-  9-2  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2490).  Scale-beam.  3.32  Ig.  X 0.19  di.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  -j-  10.9  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2964).  Scale-beam.  4.7  Ig.  X 0-12  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  6.9  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  3697).  Axe.  4.86  Ig.  X 1.78  wde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  205,  lev.  +7.1  ft. 

(5}.  (No.  4898}.  Axe.  5.7  Ig.  X 1-95  wde.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  10,  lev.  -p  12.9  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2296).  Axe.  6.34  Ig.  X 2.9  wde.  X o-3  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  263,  lev.  + 10.2  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  835).  Knife.  5.21  Ig.  X 1. 14  wde.  X o.i  th.  Trench  6(5)  loc.  63,  lev.  — 6.0ft. 

(8) .  (No.  3322).  Knife.  7.02  Ig.  X i-6  wde.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  8.0  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  2843).  Adze.  10.52  Ig.  X 1-95  wde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  -f  7.7  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  2200).  Adze.  9.7  Ig.  X 1-58  wde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + n-i  ft- 

(11) .  (No.  2847).  Adze.  8.97  Ig.  X 2.61  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev.  -f  7.0  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2602).  Spear-head.  12.83  Ig.  X 4-i7  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  + 8.3  ft. 

Plate  LXXII.  Copper  and  Bronze  Objects.  Chapter  XII 

(1) .  (No.  3486).  Knife.  9.3  Ig.  X 2.4  wde.  X 0-16  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  + 7-i  ft- 

(2) .  No.  2523,  A).  Knife,  9.56  Ig.  X 2.32  wde.  X o-i  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  -j-  10.3  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3147).  Knife.  6.1  Ig.  X 2.18  wde.  X o-i  th.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  260,  lev.  6.2  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  3496).  Knife.  6.93  Ig.  X 2.7  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  238,  lev.  -(-  8.8  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2663).  Knife.  7.43  Ig.  X i-8  wde.  X o.i  th.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  189,  lev.  + 8.8  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  5383).  Awl.  1.52  Ig.  X 0-12  wde.  X o-o7  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 15. i ft. 

(7) .  (No.  636).  Awl.  1.9  Ig.  X 0-15  wde.  X 0-15  th.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  56,  lev.  — 3.1  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1926).  Awl.  2.68  Ig.  X 0.17  wde.  X 0.17  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  141,  lev.  4-  t3-7ft- 


304 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(9).  (No.  197).  Awl.  2.12  Ig.  X 0-17  wde.  X 0.14  th.  Trench  6(3),  loc.  22,  lev.  — 4.3  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  637).  Awl.  1.5  Ig.  X 0.17  wde.  X 0-17  th.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  56,  lev.  — 4.8  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  2197).  Rod.  7.62  Ig.  X 0.2,6  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  224,  lev.  + i2-5  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3736).  Awl.  4.42  Ig.  X 0.26  wde.  X 0.26  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  394,  lev.  -}-  8.6  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2441).  Awl.  4.66  Ig.  X 0.2  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2196).  Awl.  4.74  Ig.  X 0.3  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  154,  lev.  -f  n-Sft. 

(15) .  (No.  2332).  Awl.  3.58  Ig.  X 0-2.5  wtfo-  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  -{-  n-i  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2362,  E).  Awl.  4.04  Ig.  X 0.07  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  1835).  Awl.  5.7  Ig.  X 0.13  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  166,  lev.  + 14.1  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  1958).  Pin.  (Jhukar?).  6.38  Ig.  X 0.3  wde.  X 0.27  th.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  187,  lev. 

+ 1 3-7  ft- 

(19) .  (No.  1982).  Pin  (Jhukar?).  4.34  Ig.  X 0.23  sq.  at  head.  Shank,  o.i  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc. 

196,  lev.  -4-  14.5  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  3816).  Pin.  (Jhukar?).  4.97  Ig.  X 0.61  X 0.6  wde.  & th.  at  head.  Shaft,  0.25  di. 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  379,  lev.  -j-  0.05  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  1630).  Pin.  (Jhukar?)-  4-^6  Ig.  X 0.13  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev.  16.7  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1659).  Pin.  (Jhukar?).  5.20  Ig.  X 0.16  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev.  + 16.3  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  1610).  Chisel  (Jhukar?).  3.16  Ig.  X 0.32  wde.  X 0.23  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  91,  lev. 

+ 17.2  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  108).  Arrowhead.  Iron.  (Jhangar?).  2.32  Ig.  X i-i  wde.  X 0.22  th.  Trench  B(i), 

lev.  — 2.7  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  1655).  Axe.  (Jhukar?).  3.95  Ig.  X 1.94  wde.  X i-2i  th.  Oval  socket,  0.71  X 0.82. 

Edge  1.94  wde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  112,  lev.  -f  17.6  ft. 


Plate  LXXIII.  Cop'per  and  Bronze  Objects.  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  1666).  Anow-head.  1.53  Ig.  X 0.51  wde.  X o.n  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  + 15.7ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3444,  A).  Arrowhead,  i.ii  Ig.  X 0.08  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  447,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3446,  B).  Arrowhead.  1.4  Ig.  X 0.07  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  447,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  2540).  Arrow-head.  0.65  Ig.  X 0.57  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2943).  Fish-hook.  1.12  Ig.  X 0.08  in  sect.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  488,  A).  Fish-hook.  o.43|g.  X 0.06  in  sect.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  44,  lev.  —0.7  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  3038).  Fish-hook.  1.22  1^  X 0.09  in  sect.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

Fish-hook.  1.28  Ig.  X 0.12  in  sect.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  + 2.8  ft. 

Ring.  Coiled  wire.  0.8  di.  X 0.27  wde.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  478,  lev.  — 6.6  ft 
Ring.  Coiled  wire.  0.75  di.  X o.i  wde.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  ^4,  lev.  -f  7.1  ft. 

Ring.  Coiled  wire.  0.71  di.  X 0.77  wde.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  lev. 


(8) .  (No.  3812) 

(9) .  (No.  5146). 

(10) .  (No.  3411). 

(11) .  (No.  4312). 

+ 14.1  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3167). 


^ ^ X wde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev.  -f  8.1  ft 

(13) .  (No.  364)  Arrow-head.  3.8  Ig.  X 0.54  wde.  X 0.15  th.  Trench  6(5),  lev.  — 3.9  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  3309).  Arrow-head.  1.5  Ig.  X 0.8  wde.  X 0.02  th.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  346,  lev  + 6 7ft. 
Arrow-head,  i.i  Ig.  X 0.05  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  129,  lev.  -f  9.6  ft. 
Arrow-head.  1.7  Ig.  X 0.04  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  209,  lev.  7.6  ft 
Fish-hook.  1.68  Ig.  X O.I  I th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  31 1,  lev.  + 7 i ft 
Fish-hook.  1.87  Ig.  X 0.15  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  292,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

Bangle.  2.0  di.  X 0.27  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  244,  lev.  + 7.1  ft 
Ring.  0.85  di.  X 0.12  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  + ii.zft. 

Wng.  0.93  di.  X 0.12  di  in  sect.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  1 14,  lev.  -J-  14.0  ft. 

Razor.  1.89  Ig.  X 1-99  wde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  148,  lev.  -f  6 8 ft 
Bangle.  2.18  di.  X 0.18  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  187,  lev.  + 13.7  ft 
Bangle.  2.38  di.  X 0.22  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178,  lev.  + 9.5  (t. 

Razor.  4.62  Ig.  X i-9  wde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  + 8 5 f t 
Razor.  1.72  Ig.  X 1.48  wde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  224,  lev.  -f  6.9  ft. 

Razor.  3.47  Ig.  X 2.43  wde.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  177,  lev.  -f-  8.0  ft. 


(15) .  (No.  2571). 

(16) .  (No.  3208). 
07)-  (No.  3641). 

(18) .  (No.  3487). 

(19) .  (No.  3458). 
(No.  1621). 
(No.  1908). 
(No.  3214). 

(23) .  (No.  1959). 

(24) .  (No.  2487). 

(25) .  (No.  2608). 

(26) .  (No.  2846). 

(27) .  (No.  2850). 


(20) . 

(21) . 

(22) . 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS  305 

C28).  (No.  496).  Razor.  2.46  Ig.  X 2.05  wde.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — 0.5  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2596,  B).  Bangle.  2.06  di.  X 0.23  di.  in  section.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  + 9-3  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3210).  Bangle.  2.8  di.  X 0.2-0.21  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  y/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  7.3  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  525).  Razor.  2.8  across  X o-i  th.  Trench  A(3),  loc.  36,  lev.  — 2.7  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  3319).  Razor.  2.82  Ig.  X 2..55  wde.  X o-i  th.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  434,  lev.  + 7-i  ft- 

(33) -  (No.  2359).  Razor.  3.08  Ig.  X 2..6  wde.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  + 10. o ft. 

(34) .  (No.  172).  Jar.  i.i4hi.  X i-3di.  Trench  B(3),  loc.  22,  lev.  — 4-3  ft. 

(35) *  (No.  2844).  Dish.  1.04  hi.  X io-i8  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  17 1,  lev.  + 7-2.  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  2522).  Jar-cover.  0.47  hi.  X 2.41  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  290,  lev.  -4-  9.8  ft. 

(37) -  (No.  2449).  Canister.  4.4  hi.  X 5-i  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  1800).  Jar.  3.57  hi.  X 5-4i  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  16.5  ft. 

(39) -  (No.  1977).  Kohl-jar.  3.6  hi.  X i-8i  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  i3-i  ft. 

Plate  LXXIV.  Copper  and  Bronze  Tools  and  Implements  (Groups  2529,  2593).  Chapter  XU 

(i,  I,  a).  (No.  2596,  A).  Port,  of  axe.  Inscribed  both  sides.  3.43  Ig.  X 2.67  wde.  X 0-28  th. 
Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  + 9.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2529,  H).  Ingot.  13.75  fg-  X aver.  1.4  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  -j-  10.4  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2529,  E).  Adze.  8.13  Ig.  X 1.54  wde.  X 0.16  th. 

(4) .  (No.  2529,  DD).  Saw.  10.73  Ig.  X 3-53  wde.  X 0.14  th. 

(5) .  (No.  2529,  AA).  Scale-pan.  0.25  hi.  X 2.26  di. 

(6) .  (No.  2529,  A).  Chisel.  2.31  Ig.  X 0-52  wde.  X 0.3  th. 

(7) .  (No.  2529,  V).  Jar.  3.03  hi.  X 2.28  di. 

(8) .  (No.  2529,  G).  Axe.  8.00  Ig.  X 3-25  wde.  X 0-32  th. 

(9) .  (No.  2529,00).  Adze.  8.1 1 Ig.  X 1-83  wde.  X o.z  th. 

l^>(.****>^>^* 

(10) .  (No.  2593,  C).  Platter.  1.07  hi.  X 10.02  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  -j-  9.1  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  2593,  S).  Axe.  7.25  Ig.  X 3-33  wde.  X 0.43  th. 

(12) .  (No.  2593,  X).  Knife.  9.93  Ig.  X 2.62  wde.  X 0.15  th. 

(13) .  (No.  2593,  D).  Shovel.  16.3  Ig.  X 8.62  wde.  X i'2. 

(14) .  (No.  2593,  R).  Axe.  5.05  Ig.  X 3-4  wde. 

(15) .  (No.  2593).  Group  as  found. 

(16) .  (No.  2593,  DD).  Casting.  5.7  Ig.  X i-8i  wde.  X 0.3  th. 

(17) .  (No.  2593,  V).  Knife.  8.69  Ig.  X 1-8  wde.  X o.ii  th. 

Plate  LXXV.  Copper  and  Bronze  Implements  and  Utensils  (Groups  2365,  2199).  Chapter  XU 

(1) .  (No.  2365).  Group  as  found.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev.  9.5  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2365,  B).  Jar.  6.9  hi.  X 5-9  di- 

(3) .  (No.  2365,  A).  Jar.  7.62  hi.  X 9-5  di. 

(4) .  (No.  2365,  D).  Staff-head.  2.4  hi.  X 2.2  di. 

(5) .  (No.  2365,  Q).  Adze.  13.12  Ig.  X 1-5  wde.  X 0.29  th. 

(6) .  (No.  2365, 1).  Pin.  4.0  Ig.  X 0.15  di. 

(7) .  (No.  2365,  H).  Handled-pan.  0.54  hi.  X 4-7  Ig-  X 2.9  wde. 

(8>.  (No.  2365,  F).  Adze.  6.23  Ig.  X 1.64  wde.  X 0.21  th. 

(9).  (No.  2365,  L).  Knife.  8.62  Ig.  X 2.45  wde. 

(9).  (No.  2365,  L).  Dagger(D-  to.o  Ig.  X 2.65  wde.  X 0.13  th. 

(10).  (No.  2365,  R).  Platter,  i .28  hi.  X 9-75  di. 

(10) .  (No.  2365,  R).  Platter.  1.28  hi.  X 10.21  di. 

(11) .  (No.  2199, M).  Knife.  5.62  Ig.  X 1-62  wde.  X 0.09  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  -f  11.3ft. 

(ii)-  (No.  2199,  M).  Jar-cover.  0.6  hi.  X 3-t4  di. 


3o6 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


Cii).  (No.  2199,  M).  Bangle.  1.87  di.  X 0-2.3  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  4-1 1.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2199,  E).  Bangle.  1.81  di.  X 0.18  di.  in  sect. 

(13) -  (No.  2199,  B).  Awl.  4.91  Ig.  X o.ii  di. 

(14) .  (No.  2844).  Platter.  1.04  hi.  X 10.18  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  -f-  7.2  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  2449).  Canister.  4.4  hi.  X 5-i  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9-5  ft- 

(16) .  (No.  1800).  Jar.  3.57  hi.  X 5-4i  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  + 16.5  ft. 


Plate  LXXVI.  Coffer  and  BTonze  Infplements  and  Tools.  Chafter  XII 

(0-  (No.  3145,  B).  Knife.  7.32  Ig.  X 2.16  wde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  417,  lev.  + 7.1  ft 

(2).  (No.  3145,  A).  Handled  pan.  5.38  Ig.  X 0.51  hi. 


(3) -  (No.  3152).  Chisel.  6.52  Ig.  X 0.9  wde.  X 0.4  th.  Sq.  9/G,  loc.  439,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  1994).  Axe.  4.85  Ig.  X 2.75  wde.  X 0.38  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  -}■  ti-2  ft. 


(5) .  (No.  3324,  B).  Axe.  7.25  Ig. 

(6) .  (No.  3324,0.  °-'- 


» » * » » 

Axe.  7.25  Ig.  X 3-25  wde.  0.32  th.  Sq.  7/E, 
Axe.  8.5  Ig.  X 3-3  wde.  X 0.34  th. 

* * * * If. 


* !<■ 
loc.  324,  lev.  4-  9-2  ft. 


(7) - 

(8) . 

(9). 

(10). 

(lO- 

02) . 

03) - 

04) - 

(15) . 

(16) . 
0?)- 
(18). 

09)- 

(20) . 

(21) . 

(22) . 

(23) - 

(24) - 

(25) - 

(26) . 

(27) - 

(28) . 

if- 

(29) . 

(30) - 
(30- 


(No.  2290,  B).  Knife.  9.27  Ig.  X ? X 0.17  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  4-  10.3  ft. 

(No.  835).  Knife.  5.21  Ig.  X 1-14  wde.  X o.i  th.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  63,  lev.  —6.0  ft. 
(No.  3149).  Chisel.  6.62  Ig.  X 0.89  wde.  X 0.29  th.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  119,  lev.  -f  8.0  ft. 

(No.  2295).  Chisel.  4.65  Ig.  X 0.39  wde.  X 0.36  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  262,  lev.  4-  10.7  ft. 

(No.  1989).  Chisel.  5.0  Ig.  X 0.31  wde.  X 0.19  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  142,  lev.  4*  12.5  ft. 
(No.  2642).  Chisel.  0.87  Ig.  X o.6i  wde.  X 0.17  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  4-  8.3  ft. 

(No.  2842).  Chisel.  1.83  Ig.  X o-55  wde.  X 0.42  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  114,  lev.  4’  9-i  ft- 

(No.  2384  D).  Chisel.  7.13  Ig.  X 0.37  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  4-  9.3  ft. 

(No.  3487).  Fish-hook.  1.87  Ig.  X 0.15  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  292,  lev.  4-  7.0  ft. 

(No.  2847).  Adze.  8.97  Ig.  X 2.61  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev.  4-  7.0  ft. 

(No.  2602).  Spear-head.  12.83  fg-  X 4-i7  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  4-  8.3  ft. 

(No.  2601}.  Scale-beam.  11.06  Ig.  X 0.47  di.  Sq.  6/E,  loc.  330,  lev.  + 9.2  ft. 

(No.  2596,  B).  Bangle.  2.06  di.  X 0-23  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  4“  9-3  ft. 

(No.  1959).  Bangle.  2.18  di.  X 0.18  di.  in  sect.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  187,  lev.  4-  13.7  k. 

(No.  3210).  Bangle.  2.8  di.  X 0-2  X 0.21  in  sect.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  4~  7-3  ft- 
(No.  4381).  Pin.  4.55  Ig.  X 0.09  di.  Cut.,  sq.  10/P,  loc.  379,  lev.  + 0.05  ft. 

(No.  2193).  Pin.  4.32  di.  X 0.16  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 12.1  ft. 

(No.  1859).  Pin.  4.82  Ig.  X 0.15  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  107,  lev.  -f  12.6  ft. 

(No.  2365,  K).  Knife.  3.19  Ig.  X 0.8  wde.  X 0.05  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 
(No.  2028).  Knife.  2.34  Ig.  X 0.45  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  4-  13.2  ft. 
(No.  2931).  Knife.  2.95  Ig.  X 0.48  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  285,  lev.  -f  8 2 ft 

(No.  3319).  Razor.  2.82  Ig.  X 2.55  wde.  X o.i  th.  Sq.  6/E,  loc.  434,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 

(No.  2594,  G).  Knife.  7.22  Ig.  X 2.1  wde.  Sq.  9/G,  loc.  228,  lev.  4-  9.8  ft. 

(No.  2594,  F).  Dagger(?).  12.12  Ig.  X 2.2  wde.  X 0.24  th. 

(No.  2594,  C).  Knife.  5.82  Ig.  X 1-62  wde.  X 0.07  th. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


307 


(36) .  (No.  2846).  Razor.  1.72  Ig.  X 1-48  wde.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  224,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(37) '  (No.  1655).  Axe.  3.95  Ig.  X 1.94  wde.  X i-2.i  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  112,  -f-  17.6  ft. 

Plate  LXXVII.  Pottery,  Faience,  and  Shell  Bangles.  Chafter  Xlll 

(1) .  (No.  4166).  Sealing.  Pottery.  1.45  di.  X o-6i  th.  Face  impressed  by  square  seal  0.71 

X 0.71.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + ft-  See  PI.  LII,  36. 

(2) .  (No.  1841).  Frag.  Bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.5  across;  0.15  X 0.2.1  in  sect.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  loi, 

lev.  + 14-1  ft- 

(3) -  (No.  1851).  Frag,  bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.28  across;  0.15  X 0.17  in  sect.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121, 

lev.  + 11.2ft. 

(4) .  (No.  4126).  Frag,  bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.21  X o-t5  in  sect.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  480, 

lev.  + 0-4  ft- 

(5) -  (No.  1961).  Frag,  bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.9  across;  0.13  X 0.12  in  sect  . Sq.  8/F,  loc.  117, 

lev.  -j-  9-9  ft- 

(6) .  (No.  954).  Frag,  bangle.  Sh.  1.3  Ig.  X o-5  X 0.25  in  sect.  Trench  A(4),  loc.  69,  lev. 

— 3-5  ft- 

(7) .  (No.  3722).  Frag,  bangle.  Sh.  0.35  X 0.13  in  sect.  Trench  F(2),  lev. — 3.6  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1987).  Frag,  bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.52  across;  0.18  X 0.2  in  sect.  Sq.  9/D,  loc. 

175,  lev.  + 13.3  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  1687).  Frag,  bangle.  Pot.,  Cr.  sip.  2.41  across;  0.43  X 0.44  in  section.  Trench  G(i), 

lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4429).  Frag,  bangle.  Fai.,  Ltd  blue.  2.41  across;  0.4  X 0.29  in  sect.  Mound  I,  sq. 

12/K,  loc.  15,  lev.  -f-  14.0  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  2747).  Frag,  bangle.  Pot.  Pnlc.  sip.  Dk.  rd.  dec.  0.35  X 0.12-0.26  in  sect.  Sq.  9/E, 

loc.  128,  lev.  -j-  8.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  1699).  Frag,  bangle.  Pot.  Lt.  rd.  dec.  1.9  across;  0.6  X 0.12-0.18  in  sect.  Trench 

E(0,  lev.  ?. 

(13) .  (No.  121).  Frag,  bangle.  Pot.  Pnk.  sip.  Dk.  rd.  stripes.  0.32  di.  in  sect.  Trench  C(i), 

lev.  — 5.8  ft. 


Plate  LXXVlll.  Buttons  and  Other  Ornaments.  Chapter  Xlll 

(1) .  (No.  2385).  Ornament.  Cop.  & steat.  1.61  hi.  X 1-31  wde.  X 0.62  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc. 

263,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2596, 0).  Ornament.  Cop.  Now  3.82  Ig.  X 0.31  wde.  X 0.65  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc. 

297,  lev.  + 9.3  ft. 

(3) -  (No.  2194).  Frag,  button.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.34  di.  X 0.43  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev. 

+ 13-5  ft- 

(4) .  (No.  1406).  Button.  Fai.  i.i  di.  X 0.42  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  -F  16.2  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  4764).  Button.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.9  di.  X 0.4  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  lev. 

-f-  14.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4387).  Button.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.02  di.  X 0.41  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  21,  lev. 

+ 14.4  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  5015).  Button.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.75  di.  X 0.13  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc,  67,  lev. 

+ 13.0  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4838).  Nose  or  ear-plug.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.8  di.  X o-3i  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc. 

35,  lev.  + 13.2  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3673).  Button,  Steat.  Wh.  0.44  di.  X 0-2.1  th.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  233,  lev.  -4-  7.6  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4055).  Nose  or  ear-plug.  Fai.  Wh.  0.59  di.  X o-59  Ig-  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465, 

lev.  -j-  2.3  ft. 

(11) -  (No.  3884).  Nose  or  ear-plug.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.57  Ig.  X o-53  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  424, 

lev.  -j-  2.9  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  1748).  Button.  Fai.  Cr.  0.6  Ig.  X 0.59  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  146,  lev.  + 13.5  ft. 


3o8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(13) .  (No.  3685).  Ornament.  Sh.  1.2  di.  X 0-25  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  + 7-5  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  4217).  Button.  Steat.  Wh.  i.o  di.  X 0.2  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  29,  lev. 

+ 15.6  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1957).  Button.  Fai.  Wh.  0.8  Ig.  X 0.55  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  183,  lev.  15.3  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2190).  Nose  or  ear-plug.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.84  di.  X 0.55  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  152,  lev. 

12.8  ft. 

Plate  LXXIX.  Decorated  Camelian  Beads.  Chapter  XUl 

(1) .  (No.  258).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.5  Ig.  X o-5i  vvde.  X o.ii  th.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  31,  lev. 

— 2.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2434).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.43  Ig.  X 0.43  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2485).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.53  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0.18  th.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  278,  lev.  + 9.8  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  223).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.39  Ig.  X 0.2  wde.  X 0.06  th.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 4.6  ft. 

(5) -  (No.  511).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.7  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X o-2  th.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  46,  lev.  — 5.5  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3354).  Bl.  on  wh.  i.o  Ig.  X 0.59  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  278,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  3999).  Wh.  on  rd.  Now  0.42  Ig.  X 0.51  wde.  X 0.13  th.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  473,  lev. 

+ 3.2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4320).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.54  Ig.  X 0.21  wde.  0.13  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  20, 

lev.  4-  13.8  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  590).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.3  Ig.  X 0.2  di.  Trench  E(i),  loc.  35,  lev.  — 3.8  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  2797).  Bl.  on  wh.  0.23  Ig.  X 0.33  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  125,  lev.  + 9.7  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3506).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.26  Ig.  X 0.32  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  451,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  368).  Bl.  on  wh.  Formerly  0.74  Ig.  X 0.58  wde.  X 0.17  th.  Trench  E(i),  lev. 

— 1.4  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2326,  Q).  Wh.  on  rd.  Formerly  0.4  Ig.  X 0.28  wde.  X 0.16  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215, 

lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2513).  Bl.  on  wh.  0.5  Ig.  X 0.35  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  226,  lev.  -f  9.6  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  373).  Wh.  on  rd.  Formerly  0.64  Ig.  X 0.46  wde.  X 0.15  th.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  43, 

lev.  — 3.9  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  943).  Wh.  on  rd.  0.6  Ig.  X 0.31  wde.  X 0.18  th.  Trench  D(4),  loc.  41,  lev. 

— 4.4  ft. 

Plate  LXXX.  Beads  and  Bead-tools.  Chapter  XUl 

(1) .  (No.  4226).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.9  Ig.  X 0.2-0.29  df  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev. 

+ t-3  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  4226).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.65  Ig.  X 0.2-0.3  di.  Point  o.i.  di.  Cut.,  sq  o/F. 

loc.  468,  lev.  + 1.3  ft.  ’ H w ’ 

(3) .  (No.  2375).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.15  Ig.  X 0.2  di.  Point  0.19  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215, 

lev.  10.3  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  2326,  C).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.05  Ig.  X 0.2-0.28  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

+ 10.4  ft.  ’ 

(5) .  (No.  2326,  C).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.02  Ig.  X 0.19  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

10.4  ft.  ’ 

(6) .  (No.  2304).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  0.93  Ig.  X 0.18  di.  Point  now  0.25  le.  X 0.08  di. 

Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.2  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2304).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -f  10.2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  2202).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.2  Ig.  X 0.19  di.  Head  0.26  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215, 

lev.  + 9. 1 ft. 

(9) .  (No.  2596,0).  Tube-drill.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.37  Ig.  X 0.25-0.32  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev. 

+ 9-3  ft- 

(10) .  (No.  3364).  Spacer.  Cop.  or  Br.  0.65  X 0.32  X 0.05.  Sq.  lo/C,  loc.  343,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3122).  Spacer.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.31  X 0.3  X 0.07.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  263,  lev.  -f  7.4  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


309 


(12) .  (No.  2541).  Spacer.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.52  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  291,  lev.  + 9-6  ft- 

(13) .  (No.  3032).  Spacer.  Cop.  or  Br.  0.7  X 0.32.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  7-t  ft- 

(14) .  (No.  3678).  Spacer.  Cop.  or  Br.  i.o  X 0-2.5  X 0.09.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  233,  lev.  + 7.6  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  4961).  Spacer.  Wh.  steat.  0.73  Ig.  X 0.7  wde.  X 0.18  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K, 

loc.  20,  lev.  + 1 1.2  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2326,  V).  Spacer.  Wh.  steat.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  644).  Spacer.  Wh.  pas.  0.43  X 0.36  X o.ii.  Trench  G(i),  loc.  48,  lev.  — 3.6  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2414,  C).  Spacer.  Vitr.  pas.  Lt.  blue.  0.62  X 0.8  X 0.2.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  179,  lev. 

+ 9-9  ft- 

(19) .  (No.  2414,  B).  Spacer.  Vitr.  pas.  Lt.  blue.  0.72  X 0.81  X 0.2.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  179,  lev. 

+ 9-9  ft- 

(20) .  (No.  2452).  Spacer.  Vitr.  pas.  Lt.  blue.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 8-6  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  2512).  Terminal.  Fai.  Cr.  0.65  Ig.  X 0.25-0.5  di.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  276,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  5017).  Terminal.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.79  X 0.41  X 0.15.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34, 

lev.  + 13.0  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  1972).  Terminal.  Pot.  2.6  X i-t8  X 0.5.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  119,  lev.  + 10.6  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  2526).  Terminal.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.28  X 1-03  X 0.12.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev. 

-f-  1 0.0  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  4377).  Terminal.  Fai.  Lt.  blue.  0.71  X 0.34  X 0.19.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18, 

lev.  + 13-8  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  3123).  Pendant.  Steat.  Dk.  gr.  0.23  hi.  X 0.42  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  263,  lev.  + 7.4  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  1943).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.83  hi.  X 0.31  di.  Groove  o.oi  wde.  X 0.02  dp.  Sq. 

7/F,  loc.  1 19,  lev.  + 10.8  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  3362).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.72  Ig.  X 0.29  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  298,  lev.  6.8  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3316).  Pendant.  Lt.  gr.  st.  0.61  hi.  X 0.39  di.  Groove  0.15  wde.  and  dp.  Sq.  7/E, 

loc.  97,  lev.  + 6.6  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  4059).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.74  hi.  X 0.28  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  405,  lev.  3.1  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  3226).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.3  hi.  X 0.25  di.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  12 1,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  4173).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.41  hi.  X 0.19  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  26,  lev. 

+ 1 5-7  ft- 

C33)-  (No.  4957).  Pendant.  Hor.  Bl.  0.48  X 0-^7-  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  51,  lev.  -F  12.8  ft. 

(34).  (No.  3193).  Pendant.  Car.  0.78  hi.  X 0.28  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  + 8.6  ft. 

Plate  LXXXL  Beads.  Chapter  XIII 

(1) .  (No.  2433).  Cyl.  Steat.  Wh.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  886).  Cyl.  Cop.  0.28 Tg.  X 0.22.  di.  Trench  I(i),  loc.  73,  lev.  — 1.02  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2619).  Cyl.  Pas.  Lt.  yel.  0.31  Ig.  X o-39  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  167,  lev.  -j-  10.2  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  1082).  Cyl.  Steat.  Wh.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  43,  lev. — 9.8  ft. 

(5) -  (No.  836).  Cyl.  Lap.-laz.  0.45  Ig.  X 0-15  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  42,  lev.  — 7-4  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  3330).  Cyl.  Pas.  Yell.  0.43  Ig.  X 0.21  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  299,  lev.  -(-  8.1  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2653).  Cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  0.6  Ig.  X 0-2.3  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  158,  lev.  9.1  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  2946,  A).  Cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  0.63  Ig.  X 0-09  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  6.8  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  550).  Cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  0.59  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  41,  lev.  — 2.4  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3698).  Cyl.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.62  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  236,  lev.  + 7-5  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  551).  Cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  0.7  Ig.  X o-i  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  56,  lev.  — 1.7  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2049).  Cyl.  Pot.  0.75  Ig.  X 0.21  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 12.4  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2946,  A).  Cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  0.63  Ig.  X 0-09  di-  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  4379).  Lap.-laz.  0.49  Ig.  X o-i  sq.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  0.6  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  2624,  C).  Tube-drill.  Cop.  1.62  Ig.  X 0.25-0.32  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  H-  lo-t  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  4741).  Cyl.  Pot.  1.91  Ig.  X 0.22  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  — 0.6  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  4226,  B).  Jas.  and  Br.  Dk.  rd.  veined  with  wh.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  -f-  1.3  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  4226,  C).  Jas.  and  Br.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  1.3  ft. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(19).  (No.  2640).  Cyl.,  oval  sect.  Br.  0.68  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  167,  lev. 
-f~  0.9  ft. 

C20).  (No.  4834).  Lap.-laz.  0.82  Ig.  X 0.32  wde.  X 0.29  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 
— 2.2  ft. 

(21}.  (No.  4226,  A).  Jas.  and  Br.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  i-3  E- 

(22).  (No.  2562).  Fai.  Cr.  0.61  X 0.53  X 0.16.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  227,  lev.  + lo.oft. 

(23}.  (No.  2940).  Lap.-laz.  0.9  X 0.3  X 0.27.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  + 7.4  ft. 

(24}.  (No.  2938).  ^azon  st.  Lt.  gre.  0.62  Ig.  X 0.3  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  + 6.6  ft. 

'^°°^;,Lg.-bar  cyl.  Pot,  rd.  sip.  3.61  X 0.4.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  58,  lev.  —7.2  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  3024  C)  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Pot.  2.6  Ig.  X 0.31  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  +6.9  ft. 

(27) .  CNa  399C.  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Pot.,  rd.  sip.  4.1  Ig.  X 0.39  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev. 

di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  133,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3086).  Lg.-bar.  cy  . Pot.,  rd.  sip.  3.83  Ig.  X 0.4  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  213,  lev.  + 7.3  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  1049).  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Pot.,  rd.  sip.  2.0  Ig.  X 0.41  di.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  — 3.1  ft. 

(3O.  (No.  2673).  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Car.  2.27  Ig.  X 0,41  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  131,  lev.  -f  8.2  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  2623).  Lg.-bar.  cyl  Car.  2.12  Ig.  X 0.35  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  183,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 

(33) -  (Na  26^0).^  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Ag.-car.  Yell.  & Rd.  1.42  Ig.  X 0.32  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139, 

(34) .  (No.^22|8).^  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Ag.-car.  Yell.  & Rd.  2.7  Ig.  X 0.38  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215, 

Lt-yell.  i-7lg.  X o.47di.  Trench  F(i),  lev. -4.7ft. 
(36).  (Na  275o).  Lg.-bar.  cyl.  Car.  Burnt  wh.  1.4  Ig.  x 0.39  di.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  352,  lev. 

Plate  LXXXll.  Stone  and  Glazed  Beads.  Chapter  Xlll 

rNn  Sq-  8/F,  loc.  1 17,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

di-  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  -f  15.1  ft. 

lev^— ^0  4^fr'^^  ’ ^ FC2),  loc.  65, 

(5) .  Bar^yl^^  jas.  Dk.  br.,  rd.  and  dk.  gre.  1.05  Ig.  X 0.37  di.  Sq.  9/D, 

(6) .  (No.  672).  Bar-cyl.  Mar.(?).  Pnk  1.14  Ig.  X 0.45  di.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  - 5.7  ft. 

68^'  So'  , I X ^^5),  loc.  55,  lev.  - 1.3  ft 

rS'  m ^ ^8-  X °-3  di-  Sq.  7/E,  be.  304,  lev.  +9.5  ft. 

(9).  (No.  937).  Bar.-cyl  Pas.  Wh.  0.71  Ig.  x 0.37  di.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  66,  lev  - 4.6fR 
( o).  (No.  4902).  Bar.-cy  . Fai.  I^.  gre.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  12,  lev.  -f  13.0  ft. 
r Pas.  Cr.  0.85  Ig.  X 0.28  di.  Trench  L(i),  lev.  + 8 2ft 

X °-4  di.  Trench  D(0,  level 

( 3)-  Bar.-cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  Moulded.  0.49  Ig.  X 0.29  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

Par.-cyl  Fai.,  Br.  and  Wh.  1.07  Ig.  X 0.3  di.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  —0.7  ft 
( 5)-  Pas.  Wh.  with  purp.  band.  0.93  Ig.  X 0.33  di.  Trench  K(0,  loc. 

(16).  (No.  2945).  Bar.-cyl  Pas.,  wh.  Dk.  br.  band.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev. -f  7.0  ft 

rN°'  Sq.  9/D,  li.  264XV.  -f  7.0  ft. 

( ).  (N^^^^^59)-  Bar.-cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  Lt.  gre.  band.  0.7  Ig.  X 0.31  di.  Sq.  9/^lL.  137,  lev. 

(19) .  '^No-^38o)-  ^Par.-cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  Purp.-bl.  band.  0.85  Ig.  X 0.29  di.  Trench  D(0,  loc.  41, 

(20) .  (No.  3020).  Bar.-cyl.  Pas.Wh.  Br.  band.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  1 36,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


311 


(21) -  (No.  2646).  Bar.-cyl.  Pas.  Wh.  Br.  band.  1.03  Ig.  X o-3  di-  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + 8.2  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  2945).  Bar.  Pas.  Wh.  Br.  band.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3681).  Bar.  Quartz.  Lt.  gr.  0.75  Ig.  X 0.29  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  461,  lev.  + 7.3  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  1108).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.65  Ig.  X 0.29  wde.  X 0.09  th.  Trench  0(0,  loc.  49,  lev. 

8 8 ft 

(25) .  (No.  2458).  Jas.  Dk.  rd.  & gr.  0.73  Ig.  X 0.48  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev. 

-j-  9-8  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  2326,  V).  Jas.  Dk.  gre.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  2452).  Jas.  Sq.9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. + 8.6  ft.  ^ . o r 

(28) .  (No.  1808).  Ag.  Gr.  & Br.  bands.  0.8  Ig.  X 0.47  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  + 18.2  It. 

(29)  (No.  1606).  Banded  ag.  Br.  & Wh.  0.5  Ig.  X 0.25  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  96,  lev.  + 16.0  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  2961).  Ag.  Yell,  veined  Wh.  0.65  Ig.  X 0.4  di.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  378,  lev.  + 7.3  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  292).  Ag.  Gr.  0.49  Ig.  X 0.3  di.  Trench  B(4),  lev. — 5.6  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  1595).  Lim.(?).  Lt.br.  Fossil  of  creature  with  scaly  carapace  and  sternum.  0.52  Ig. 

X 0.33  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  109,  lev.  + 16.5  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  1940).  Onyx.  Wh.  with  Br.  ends.  0.59  Ig.  X 0.3  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 19,  lev.  + 10.5  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  2326,  V).  Ag.  Br.  & Wh.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(35) .  (No.  4494).  St.  Wh.  veined  with  rd.  & hi.  0.7  Ig.  X 0.43  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/C, 

loc.  488,  lev.  — 1.2  ft.  T.  c o /r’ 

(36) .  (No.  2581).  Steat.  Wh.  Stained  rd.  in  patches.  0.5  Ig.  X o-33  wde.  X 0-2.2  th.  bq.  b/C, 

loc.  295,  lev.  + 9.6  ft.  o n T’  1 1 

(37) .  (No.  1609).  Plas.  Dk.  gre.  0.48  Ig.  X 0.35  wde.  X 0.18  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev. 

(38) .  (Na  1651).  St.  Gr.  mottled  with  Wh.  0.6  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136, 

lev.  + 17.0  ft.  1 0 ,T^  1 

(39) .  (No.  2201).  Steat.  Wh.,  stained  with  red.  i.o  Ig.  X 071  wde.  X 0.43  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc. 

215,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

(40) .  (No.242o,B).  Vitr.pas.  Blue.  Sq.9/D,loc.2i5,lev.  + 9.3ft-  „ , 

(41) .  (No.  2326,  L).  Vitr  pas.  Blue.  0.68  Ig.  X o-55  wde.  X 0.25  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

(42) .  (nI  235!^'  Brec.  Gr.,  dk.  br.  & wh.  0.98  Ig.  X 0.73  wde.  X 0.3  th  . Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  261, 

(43) .  (No.  3<^3).^  Pas.  Cr.  0.53  Ig.  X 0.53  wde.  X o-i3  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  126,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 


Plate  LXXXIII. 

(1) .  (No. 

(2) .  (No. 

(3) .  (No. 

(4) .  (No. 

(5) .  (No. 

(6) .  (No. 

(7) .  (No. 

(8) .  (No. 

(9) .  (No. 

(10) .  (No. 

(11) .  (No. 

(12) .  (No. 

(13) .  (No. 

(14) .  (No. 

(15) .  (No. 

(16) .  (No 

(17) .  (No 


Stowe  and  Faience  Beads.  Cha^pter  XllI 

5305).  Pot.  0.52  Ig.  X 0.8  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

4396).  Pot.  0.73  Ig.  X I-I4  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  292,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

4524).  Pot.,  cr.  sip.  0.7  Ig.  X 1.51  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

3570).  Pot.  o.81g.  X 1-3  di.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — 7.9  ft. 

3576).  Pot.  0.4  Ig.  X 0.89  di.  Trench  K(i),  lev.  — 2.7  ft. 

2754).  Pot.  0.45  Ig.  X 0.92  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  96,  ley.  + 8.3  ft. 

3770).  Fai.  0.41  Ig.  X 0.48  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  268,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 

2477).  Pas.  Wh.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  99,  lev.  + 9.8  ft. 

2192).  Sh.  0.21  Ig.  X 0.45  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  102,  lev.  + 12.8  ft. 

369).  Pas.  Wh.  0.35  Ig.  X 0.51  di.  Trench  C(3),  lev.  — 9-0  ft. 

4163).  Lap.-laz.  0.19  Ig.  X 0.27  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/G  loc.  483,  lev.  + 0.9  ft. 
4118).  Car.  0.21  Ig.  X 0.2.5  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  23,  lev.  + 15.5  «. 
3997).  Car.  0.3  Ig.  X 0.3  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev  + 3.2  ft. 

513).  Pas.  Wh.  0.38  Ig.  X 0.49  di.  Trench  F(i:),  loc  46,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

3682).  Pot.,  Lt.  rd.  sip.  0.55  Ig.  X 0.87  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  241,  lev.  + 7.8  ft. 
1893).  Onyx.  Bl.  & Wh.  0.18  Ig.  X 0.25  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  + 14.1  ft. 
4901).  Quartz.  Milky  Wh.  0.25  Ig.  X 0.31  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477, 
2.9  ft. 


lev. 


312 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(18) .  (No.  3455).  Chal.  0.27  Ig.  X 0-32,  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  244,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  2493).  Pas.  Wh.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  154,  lev.  + 9.8  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  2206).  Car.  0.3  Ig.  X 0.32  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev.  -|-  13.0  ft. 

(20-  (No.  2565).  Car.  0.28  Ig.  X 0-31  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  143,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  3505).  Pas.  Cr.  0.3  Ig.  X 0-31  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  449,  lev.  7-6  ft- 

(23) .  (No.  3549).  Pas.  Wh.  0.22  Ig.  X 0-3  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  393,  lev.  -f-  13.6  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  4699).  Steat.  Wh.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  35,  lev.  + 13.6  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  1656).  Car.  0.4  Ig.  X o-4  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  + 16.9  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  1078).  Pas.  Wh.  0.35  Ig.  X 0-53  di.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  73,  lev.  + o.i  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3331)-  Pas.  Yell.  0.2  Ig.  X o-35  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  331,  lev.  + 7.8  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  1103).  Pas.  Wh.  Trench  G(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — 7.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  1010).  Pas.  Wh.  Trench  D( I ),  loc.  41,  lev.  — 6.9  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3346).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.2  Ig.  X 0-31  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  284,  lev.  + 6.6  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  4065).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.21  Ig.  X 0.31  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  3-i  ft- 

(32) .  (No.  2500).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.28  Ig.  X 0-33  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  226,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(33) -  (No.  2856).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.14  Ig.  X 0-3  di.  Mound  II. 

(34) .  (No.  1211).  Pas.  Wh.  Trench  I( I ),  loc.  73,  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 

(35) -  (No.  561).  Steat.  Wh.  0.19  Ig.  X 0.58  di.  Trench  A(3},  loc.  40,  lev.  — 6.7  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  1305).  Steat.  Wh.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  78,  lev. — 4.5  ft. 

(37) -  (No.  515).  Steat.  Wh.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev. — 7.6  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  515).  Steat.  Wh.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  42,  lev. — 7.6  ft. 

(39) -  (No.  581).  Steat.  Wh.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  41,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  2433).  Steat.  Wh.  o.i  Ig.  X 0-13  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  4-9-4ft- 

(41) .  (No.  2433).  Steat.  Wh.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9.4  ft. 

(42) .  (No.  41 17).  Pot.  0.4  Ig.  X 1-3  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  21,  lev.  + 15.8  ft. 

(43) -  (No.  2326,  V).  Steat.  Wh.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.4  ft. 

(44) .  (No.  501).  Steat.  Trench  F(i),  loc.  46,  lev.  — 5.4  ft. 

(45) .  (No.  3217).  Pas.  Wh.  O.I  I Ig.  X o-5  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  290).  Fai.,  Lt.  gre.  0.09  Ig.  X 0-3  di.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 1.8  ft. 

(47) .  (No.  2326,  V).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  10.4  ft. 

(48) .  (No.  522).  Fai.  Wh.  0.09  Ig.  X 0-31  di.  Trench  B(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(49) .  (No.  2077).  Steat.  Wh.  0.48  Ig.  X o-9  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  + 13.2  ft. 

(50) .  (No.  2645).  Steat.  Wh.  2.4  Ig.  X o-3  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  + 8.2  ft. 

(51) .  (No.  4066).  Steat.  Wh.  2.5  Ig.  X 0.55-0.7  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  407,  lev.  -f- 2.9  ft. 

(52) .  (No.  4116).  Fai.  Yell.  0.38  Ig.  X 0.13  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  23,  lev.  -f-  15.5  ft. 

C53)-  (No.  4427).  Fai.  Lt.  blue.  0.35  Ig.  X 0.2  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev.  19.0  ft. 

(54) .  (No.  521).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.73  Ig.  X 0-8  wde.  0.27  th.  Trench  6(5),  loc.  55,  lev.  — i-3ft- 

(55) .  (No.  630).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.72  Ig.  X 0.59  vi^de.  X 0.26  th.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 4.4  ft. 

(56) .  (No.  3196).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.62  Ig.  X 0.57  wde.  X 0.27  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev.  -|-  6.7  ft. 
C57)-  (No.  2546).  Ag.  Yell,  veined  with  Wh.  Unfinished.  1.61  Ig.  X i-33  wde.  X 0.35  th. 

Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  + 9.1  ft. 

Plate  LXXXIV.  Stone  and  Pottery  Beads.  Chapter  XllI 

(1) .  (No.  1020).  Pas.  Wh.  1.2  Ig.  X 0.7  wde.  X 0.21  th.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 5.5  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2422,  B).  Vitr.  pas.  Blue.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 9-3  ft- 

(3) -  (No.  3079).  Pas.  Wh.  0.62  Ig.  X 0.37  wde.  X 0.12  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  129,  lev.  -j-  6.9  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  665).  Ag.  Br.  0.88  Ig.  X 0.82  wde.  X 0-15  th.  Trench  F(2),  loc.  64,  lev.  — 0.2ft. 

(5) -  (No.  494).  Ag.  Wh.  (calcined).  0.76  Ig.  X 0.52  wde.  X 0.21  th.  Trench  E(i),  loc. 

33,  lev.  — 6.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2566).  Sh.  0.7  Ig.  X 0.8-0.88  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  297,  lev.  -j-  10.4ft. 

(7) .  (No.  3889).  Sh.  0.63  Ig.  X 0.58-0.63  di.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  474,  lev.  -j-  5.2  ft 

(8) .  (No.  1333).  St  Dk.  gr.  0.89  Ig.  X 0.31-0.58  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  31,  lev.  — 3.5  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


313 


(9).  (No.  2647).  Pas.  Lt.  Yell.  0.5  Ig.  X 0-62  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  174,  lev.  + 8.2  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  5145).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.6  Ig.  X 0.7  wde.  X 0.29  th.  Sq.  lo/F,  loc.  471,  lev.  + 6.3  ft. 

(11) .  (No. 4703).  Pot.  Rd.  sip  0.52  Ig.  X o-6i  wde.  X 0-2.3  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37, 

lev.  + 13.7  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2567).  St.  Rd.  with  Wh.  vein.  0.44  Ig.  X 0.5  wde.  X 0.21  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  243, 

lev.  -j-  9.0  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2420,  A).  Ag.  Yell,  veined  with  Rd.  2.1 1 Ig.  X 0.35-0.72  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

+ 9-3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2684).  Pot.  0.37  Ig.  X I -01  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  346,  lev.  + 8.7  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  5317).  Pot.  0.51  Ig.  X i-ii  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 4.9  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  4966).  Pot.  0.68  Ig.  X i-o  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  — 5.4  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  2022).  Pot.  0.54  Ig.  X i-i  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  199,  lev.  13. i ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2852).  Pot.  0.7  Ig.  1.07  di.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  339,  lev.  6.6  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1916).  Pot.  0.66  Ig.  X 1-22  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  + 15.6  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  3946).  Pot.  Rd.  marks.  0.72  Ig.  X i-i5  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  -f-  4.0  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3846).  Pot.  i.o  Ig.  X 1-32  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  -j-  2.4  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1009).  Pot.  0.9  Ig.  X 1-4  di.  Trench  A( 3),  lev. — 3.2  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3225).  Pot.  0.7  Ig.  X 1-2  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  -{•  7.0  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  4050).  Pot.  0.85  Ig.  X 0.96  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  2.6  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  5304).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.93  Ig.  X i-o  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  2221).  Pot.  Gr.  1. 21  Ig.  X 1-43  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  192,  lev.  -f-  11.7  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3995).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  0.89  Ig.  X i-i  di-  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  16,  lev.  18.3  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  1396).  Pot.  0.9  Ig.  X i-i  di.  Trench  I(i),  loc.  73,  lev.  — 8.4  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2851).  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  1.0  Ig.  X i-oi  di.  Sq.  lo/D,  loc.  339,  lev.  + 6.6  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  1473).  Pot.  0.82  Ig.  X i-i  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  — 18.2  ft. 

Plate  LXXXV.  Beads  and  Other  Objects.  Chapter  XIII 

(0-  (No.  3945).  Fai.  Lt.  yell.  0.55  Ig.  X 1-2  di.  Cut,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  410,  lev.  + 3.0  ft 

(2) .  (No.  1598).  Fai.  Lt  gre.  0.44  Ig.  X 0-88  di.  Locus  and  level  ?. 

(3) -  (No.  1948).  Fai.  Lt  gr.  0.37  Ig.  X 0.8  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev.  -f-  14-3  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  2354).  Fai.  Cr.  0.39  Ig.  X o-93  di.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  252,  lev.  9.2  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  4172).  Fai.  Lt.  gr.  0.5  Ig.  X o.i  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  26,  lev.  + i5-7ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2314).  Fai.  Lt  gr.  0.39  Ig.  X 0.88  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  161,  lev.  12. i ft 

(7) .  (No.  2023).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.4  Ig.  X 0.98  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev.  + 13.2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1852).  Fai.  Cr.  0.29  Ig.  X o-53  di.  Locus  and  level  ?. 

(9) .  (No.  2402).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.55  Ig.  X o-9  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  -|-  9.5  ft 

(10) .  (No.  1739).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.41  Ig.  X i-i  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  loi,  lev.  15.4  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  2299).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.72  Ig.  X 1.09  di.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  154,  lev.  11.3  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  1913).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.8  Ig.  X i-o  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev.  + 15.5  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2403).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.98  Ig.  X i-odi.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  256,  lev. -|- lo.o  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  2036).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.82  Ig.  X 1.04  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev. 12.0  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1889).  Fai.  Lt.  blue.  i.i9lg.  X 1.04  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  136,  lev.  15-7  E- 

(16) .  (No.  2958).  Fai.  Lt.  gr.  i.o  Ig.  X i-i  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  254,  lev.  + 7.0  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  1729).  Fai.  Rd.  1.3  Ig.  X i-i9di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev. 13.7  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2205).  Fai.  Cr.  0.92  Ig.  X 1.02  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  200,  lev. ii.6ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1479).  Fai.  Lt  yell.  0.56  Ig.  X i-35  di.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  97,  lev.  -|-  14. i ft. 

(20) .  (No.  2312).  Fai.  Lt  purp.  0.48  Ig.  X 0.98  di.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  145,  lev.  -\-  10.4  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  2552).  Fai.  Lt  yell.  0.46  Ig.  X 0-98  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  105,  lev.  -|-  9.7  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  562).  Terminal.  Lap.-laz.  0.21  Ig.  X 0-32  wde.  X o-n  th.  Trench  A/3,  loc.  40, 

lev.  — 6.7  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  846).  Lap.-laz.  0.47  Ig.  X 0-61  di.  Trench  I(i),  loc.  62,  lev.  — 6.8  ft 

(24) .  (No.  2430).  Fai.  Lt.  gr.  0.93  Ig.  X t-02.  di.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  1 18,  lev.  9.9  ft. 


314 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(25) .  (No.  2755).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  i.i  Ig.  X i-i5  di-  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  219,  lev.  + 8.3  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  2009).  Fai.  Cr.  i.i  Ig.  X di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev.  + 13.1  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  492).  Amulet.  Pot.  1.63  Ig.  X wde.  X o-it  th.  Trench  B/5,  loc.  44,  lev. 

■ — • 0.79  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  1664).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.62  Ig.  X i-2  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  135,  lev.  + 12.3  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  900).  Pendant.  Sh.  1.3  Ig.  X 0-32  di.  Trench  I(i),  loc.  78,  lev.  — o.i  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  238).  Cop.  0.29  di.  X 0.15  wde.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  278).  Cop.  0.36  di.  X o-i8  wde.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  278,  lev.  -|-  9.8  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  i960).  Terminal.  Amazon  st.  Lt.  gr.  0.44  Ig.  X 0.24  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  162,  lev. 

+ 14-3  ft- 

(33) -  (No.  2689).  Cop.  0.2  Ig.  X 0-3  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  197,  lev.  8.7  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  2078).  Fitting.  Sh.  0.75  hi.  X 0.7  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  138,  lev.  13. i ft. 

Plate  LXXXVl,  a.  Beads  and  Micro-photogra'phs.  Cha-pter  XIll 

(1) .  (No.  2307).  Unfinished  disc-beads.  Car.  Aver.  0.33  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  + 10.2  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2307).  Unfinished  disc-beads.  Car.  Aver.  0.58  di.  X o-2.i  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215, 

lev.  -f-  10.2  ft. 

(3,  a).  (No.  3161).  Unfinished  disc-bead.  Car.  Mag.  X3  times.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  259,  lev. 
-f  7.0  ft. 

(3.  b).  (No.  3161).  Same. 

(4) .  (No.  3686).  End  of  broken  bead.  Car.  Mag.  X 9 times.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  394,  lev.  4-  7-9  ft- 

(5) -  (No.  4758).  End  of  drill.  Ch.  Mag.  X 12  times.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — i.oft. 

(6) .  (No.  2447).  Unfinished  bead.  Br.  steat.  Mag.  X 25  times.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. -|- 9.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  3686).  End  of  bead.  Car.  Mag.  X 9 times.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  394,  lev.  7.9  ft. 

Plate  LXXXVl,  b.  Beads  and  Bead-drills.  Chapter  Xlll 

(1) .  (No.  4205).  Perf.  sh.  Cr.  Now  1.05  Ig.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  475,  lev.  + o-6  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  747).  Cowrie.  Perf.  Cr.  1.51%.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 

(3) -  (No.  67).  Cowrie.  Unperf.  Pnk.  dappled  with  yell.  1.9  Ig.  Trench  C(i),  lev. — 3-5  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  1185).  Cowrie.  Unperf.  Cr.  i.olg.  Trench  G(i),  lev. — 4.1ft. 

(5) .  (No.  276).  Cowrie.  Unperf.  Lt.  yell.  1.02  Ig.  Trench  E(2),  lev. — 5-4  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4603).  Sh.  Perf.  Cr.  i.oi  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  488,  lev.  — 1.4  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  1417).  Jhangar  bead.  Dk.-gr.  clay,  no  sip.  1.57  di.  X 1-62  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  93, 

lev.  -f-  18.6  ft. 

(8,  a).  (No.  3526,  A).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.15  Ig.  X o.ii  di.  Sq.  9/G,  loc.  293,  lev.  7.0  ft. 

(8,  b).  (No.  3551).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  0.74  Ig.  X 0-13  di.  Sq.  8/c,  loc.  450,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(8,  c).  (No.  3174).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  i.i  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  + 7-9  ft- 

(8,  d).  (No.  3448).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.05  Ig.  X o-n  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  108,  lev.  + 7-4  ft. 

(8,  e).  (No.  3173).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.5  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  105,  lev. 7.6  ft. 

(8,  f).  (No.  3172,  A).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.23  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  141,  lev.  + 7.7  ft. 

(8,g).  (No.  3551,  A).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.28  Ig.  X o.ii  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  450,  lev. -|- 7.7  ft. 

(8,  h).  (No.  3172,  B).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  0.73  Ig.  X o-n  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  141,  lev.  + 7-7  ft. 

(8,  i).  (No.  259).  Drill.  Bl.  ch.  0.58  Ig.  X 0.12  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  31,  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 

(9).  Brought  in  by  carrier.  3.3  long. 

(10) .  (No.  1 17).  Unfinished  drill.  Bl.  ch.  1.5  Ig.  X 0-29  wde.  X 0.22  th.  Trench  C(i),  lev. 

— 5.7  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4739).  Brick.  End  missing.  5.2  wde.  X 2-3^  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  ii,  lev. 

+ 13-3  ft- 

Plate  LXXXVII.  Beads  and  Other  Ornaments  (Jhukar  Culture).  Chapter  XIlI 

(i).  (No.  3497).  Bead-amulet.  Hard  st.  Cr.  0.79  di.  X 0.31  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev. 
-f  2.5  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


315 


(2) .  (No.  1267).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.02  Ig.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. 2.2.7  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  3915).  Fai.  Wh.  1.02  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  423,  lev.  + 3.8  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  4218).  Fai.  Gr.  0.81  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  29,  lev.  + 15-6  ft. 

(5) -  (No.  2005).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.88  Ig.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev.  + 16.7  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  1289).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  i.olg.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  84,  lev. -f- 21.2  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  1718).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.47  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  17.0  ft. 

(7,  a).  (No.  1601).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.9  Ig.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  150,  lev.  -f  16.7  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1284).  Fai.  Cr.  0.7  di.  X o-45  Ig-  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  -|-  23.4  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3833).  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  0.73  di.  X 0.57  Ig.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + 2.3  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  1274).  Fai.  Yell.  gl.  0.8  di.  X 0-58  Ig.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  + i5-o  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  1288).  Gr.  pot.;  bl.  sip.  Polished.  1.6  Ig.  X i-2  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev.  + 21.5  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  1415).  Gr.  pot.  0.96  Ig.  X 1-32  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  87,  lev.  -f-  17.6  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  1445).  Gr.  pot.  Semi-polished.  0.9  Ig.  X 1-22  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  19.4  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  1906).  Gr.  pot.;  bl.  sip.  1.15  Ig.  X 1.35  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  14.7  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1577).  Gr.  pot.  Polished  surf.  2.1  Ig.  X i-5  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  -F  17.1  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  1573).  Gr.  pot.  1.38  Ig.  X 1-02  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  86,  lev.  -|-  17.5  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  3039).  Gr.  pot.  Semi-polished.  0.84  Ig.  X 1-05  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  377,  lev. 

+ 7.2  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  3955).  Gr.  pot.  0.69  Ig.  X 0.82  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  471,  lev.  + 2.8  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1650).  Dr.  pot.  0.7  Ig.  X 1-3  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  137,  lev.  16.6  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  4227).  Bead-amulet.  Wh.  steat.  0.78  di.  X 0-38  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  484,  lev. 

— o.i  h. 

(21) .  (No.  2902).  Gr.  pot.  1.03  Ig.  X i-i8  di.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  252,  lev.  -{-  7.2  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1417).  Jhangar  bead.  Gr.  pot.  1.62  Ig.X  1.57  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  93,  lev. 18.6  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  1453).  Bead-amulet.  Fai.  Lt.  blu.  0.92  di.  X 0.23  Ig.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev. -f- 16.8  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  1268).  Bead-amulet.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.8  di.  (estimated)  X 0-56  th.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83, 

lev.  -|-  20.2  ft. 

Plate  LXXXVlll.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Chapter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  2633).  Bulla.  Pot.  Rd.  sip.  1.5  di.  X 0-22  th.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  274,  lev.  + 9.6  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3779).  Bulla.  Pot.  1.36  di.  X 0.22  th.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  271,  lev.  -j-  6.7  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  1895).  Bulla.  Pot.  1.23  di.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  98,  lev.  -4-  12.0  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  5320).  Cone.  Pot.  1.2  hi.  X 0-95  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  51,  lev.  -}-  12.6  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  3907).  Button.  Pot.  1.8  di.  X 0.7  th.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 0.7  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  5408).  Handle.  Pot.  3.68  Ig.  X 2.67  wde.  X 1.06  th.  Cut.,  sq.  to/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 

— 20.5  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  4196).  Tube.  Pot.  4.2  Ig.  X 1.2.2  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  401,  lev. -|- 8.2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  3374).  Tube.  Pot.  6.01  Ig.  X 2.0  di.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  155,  lev.  + 11.5  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  5405).  Tube.  Pot.  5.62  Ig.  X 2.03  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  477,  lev.  — 16.2  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4804).  Tube.  Pot.  3.25  Ig.  X 1-22  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  464,  lev.  1.3  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  2012).  Mould.  Pot.  3.0  di.  X 1. 4 1 hi.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev, 13.0  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  4238).  Tube.  Pot.  8.0  Ig.  X 1.22  di.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  449,  lev.  + 7-6  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2517).  Tube.  Pot.  5.23  Ig.  X 2.91  di.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  134,  lev.  + ti.6ft. 

(14) .  (No.  1991).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  18.82  Ig.  X 6.36  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev.  -|-  11.2  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1991).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  t8.6  Ig.  X 7-2  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev. -f- 1 1.2  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  3464).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  18.9  Ig.  X 5-64  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  + 9.5  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  2720).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  12.25  Ig.  X 5*29  di.  Sq.  6/C,  loc.  266,  lev.  + 8.5  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2236).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  19.0  Ig.  X 6.4  di.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 10.8  ft. 

Plate  LXXXIX.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Chapter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  2188).  Amulet.  Fai.  1.2  Ig.  X o-8  wde.  X 0.61  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  82,  lev.  + i3-4ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2936).  Jar.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  1.5  hi.  X i-35  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  224,  lev.  -f-  6.9  ft. 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


316 


C3).  (No.  1547).  Model  head-rest.  Pot.  1.3  Ig.  X 1-2.  wde.  X i-3  hi-  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev. 
16. 1 ft. 

(4) .  (No.  5029).  Pedestal.  Pot.  3.9  hi.  X 7-43  di.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev.  -f  i4-oR- 

(5) .  (No.  1618).  Pin.  Ivory.  1.7  Ig.  X 0.13  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  123,  lev.  -f  18.0  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4005).  Pendant.  Gr.  steat.  1.14  Ig.  X 0.5  wde.  X °-3  th.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  421, 

lev.  4.3  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2405).  Peg.  Ivory.  1.72  Ig.  X 0.55  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -f  9.3  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  1278).  Ring.  Pot.  0.91  di.  X o.ii  th.  Trench  E(i),  loc.  33,  lev.  — 4-9 ft. 

(9) .  (No.  4317).  Weight.  Ag.  1.28  di.  X o.ii  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  423,  lev.  +0.1^  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  3822).  Weight.  Ag.  i.iqdi.  X 0.75  hi.  27.36  gms.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  3,  lev. 

+ 15.8  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3882).  Weight.  Ag.  0.75  di.  X 0-52.  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  6,  lev.  + 16.4  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3488).  Comb.  Ivory.  1.79  Ig.  X 2.4  wde.  X 0-2  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  205,  lev.  -f-  7.1  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  2626).  Jar-stopper.  Sh.  0.63  Ig.  X 0.88  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  310,  lev.  10. i ft. 

(14) .  (No.  3409).  Frag,  of  cover.  Sh.  1.27  di.  X 0-2  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  281,  lev.  + 7.5  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  2351).  Object.  Ivory.  1.59  Ig.  X 0.26  wde.  X 0.34  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  190,  lev. 

-f  10.5  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  5198).  Mace-head.  Purp.-gr.  sand.  4.1  di.  X °-77  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  51, 

lev.  -j-  12.8  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  5219).  Mace-head.  Wh.  lim.  3.78  di.  X i-2i  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  18,  lev. 

+ 13-3  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2003).  Pendant.  Sh.  2.45  Ig.  X 0-52  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  13.0  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  5218).  Mace-head.  Wh.  lim.  1.89  di.  X i-7i  hi.  Mound  I,  sq  12/K,  loc.  38, 

lev.  -f  13.0  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  4775).  Mace-head.  Cr.  lim.  2.3  di.  X i-9  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  37,  lev. 

+ I3-I  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3693).  Whetstone.  Gre.-gr.  st.  7.37  Ig.  X o-53  wde.  X o-8  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  31 1, 

lev.  + 7-1  ft- 

(22) .  (No.  3684).  Mace-head.  Cr.  lim.  2.09  di.  X 1-71  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  394,  lev.  + 7.9  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  1126).  Mace-head.  Gr.  lim.  2.4di.  X 2.3  hi.  Trench  A(4),  loc.  69,  lev.  — 5-3  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  i860).  Model  axe.  Pot.  2.21  Ig.  X i-4  wde.  X 0.3  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  113,  lev. 

-f  11.6  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  3608).  Mace-head.  Cr.  lim.  1.81  di.  X 1.61  hi.  Trench  H(i),  loc.  51,  lev. — 8.0  ft, 

(26) .  (No.  2838).  Mace-head.  Cr.  lim.  1.59  di.  X 1-4  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev. -f- 8-4  ft- 

(27) .  (No.  3721).  Rubber.  Dk.  gr.  st.  6.2  Ig.  X 2.38  wde.  X 3-97  hi.  Trench  F(2),  lev. 

— 3.6  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  4537).  Drill-head.  Cr.  lim.  2.41  di.  X i-9  hi.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  121,  lev.  -f  6.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  3660).  Mace-head.  Cr.  lim.  Unfin.  1.51  di.  X 1.64  hi.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — 3.8  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  3170).  Model  axe.  Pot.  2.68  Ig.  X i-77  wde.  X 0.37  th.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  418,  lev. 

+ 7.0  ft. 

Plate  XC.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Chapter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  2991).  Shell.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. -)- 9.3  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2408).  Feeding-cup.  Sh.  4.82  Ig.  X 0-67  wde.  X 0.07  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

+ 9-4  ft- 

(3) -  (No.  2973).  Dish.  Sh.  3.01  Ig.  X 2.77  wde.  X 0.6  hi.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  197,  lev.  + 8.9  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  4359).  Dish.  Sh.  3.1  Ig.  X 2.18  wde.  X 0.53  hi.  Sq.  7/D,  loc.  321,  lev.  -j-  7.1  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2587).  Part  of  cone.  Sh.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev. -)- 10.2  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  4308).  Ladle.  Sh.  Unfin.  9.61  Ig.  X 6-11  wde.  X 3-2  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  21 1,  lev 

+ 1 1 .6  ft. 

(7) -  (No.  4831).  Inlay.  Sh.  1.5  Ig.  X o.ii  wde.  X 0-2  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev. 

+ 13-4  ft- 

(8) .  (No.  4602).  Inlay.  Sh.  1.36  Ig.  X o-i  wde.  X 0.14  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  5,  lev 

+ 14-2  ft. 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


317 


(9).  (No.  4366).  Dish.  Sh.  2.91  Ig.  X 2..14  wde.  X 0.8  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  153,  lev.  + 6.9  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  2624,  A).  Dish.  Sh.  2.32  Ig.  X 2..27  wde.  X 0.6  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  -|-  lo-i  ft- 

(11) .  (No.  2587).  Part  of  cone.  Sh.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev. 10.2  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  2587).  Part  of  cone.  Sh.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  151,  lev. -j- 10.2  ft. 

(13) -  (No.  2453).  Ladle.  Sh.  1.23  Ig.  X 0.4  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  179,  lev.  9.8  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  4698).  Ladle.  Sh.  2.51  Ig.  X 2.0  wde.  X o-7  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/J,  loc.  11,  lev. 

+ 14.1  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  2871).  Bangles.  Sh.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  181,  lev. 8.0  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  2379).  Object.  Sh.  3.41  Ig.  across.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  + 10. i ft. 

(17) .  (No.  4046).  Ladle.  Sh.  Unfin.  3.2  Ig.  X 3-2.  wde.  X 0.98  hi.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  171,  lev. 

+ 7.2  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  2326,  K).  Object.  Sh.  2.51  Ig.  X 0.75  wde.  X 0.51  hi.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

+ 10.3  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  5450).  Carved  object.  Sh.  2.37  hi.  X 3.2.0  wde.  Cut.,  sq.  10/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 

— 25.1  ft. 

(20) .  The  same. 

(21) .  The  same. 

(22) .  (No.  3155).  Dish.  Sh.  5.71  Ig.  X 4.42  wde.  X 1.9  hi.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  103,  lev.  12.0  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3031).  Paddle.  Bone.  Now  i4.23lg.  X 2.22 wde.  X 0.36  th.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  no,  lev. 

+ 8.7  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  4238).  Tube.  Pot.  8.0  Ig.  X 1.22  di.  Sq,  8/B,  loc.  449,  lev. 7-6  ft- 

(25) .  (No.  4564).  Tube.  Pot.  7.1  Ig.  X 1-4  di.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev. 7.5  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  1441).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.7  X 2.51  di.  X 0.47  th.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  88,  lev.  11.2  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  1100).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.7  X 2.5  di.  X 0.4  th.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 3.4  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  967).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.3  di.  X 0.34  th.  Trench  B(5),  lev. — 4.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  968).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.3  di.  X 0.2.3  A-  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 2.7  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  2236).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  19.0%.  X 5.39'?.42di.  Trench  H(i),  lev. — 10.8 ft. 

(31) .  (No.  2234).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  19.5  Ig.  X 5.49‘7.24  di.  Trench  H(i),  lev.  + 10.8  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  2198).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  16.7  Ig.  X 3.75'5.o  di.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  226,  lev.  + 1 1.7  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  2292).  Drain-pipe.  Pot.  16.75  Ig.  X 3.86-5.02  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  216,  lev.  -j-  10.2  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  3002).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.26  Ig.  X 2.7  di.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  + 9-1  ft. 

(35) .  (No.  2007).  Bangle.  Fai.  Cr.  glaze.  2.3  across,  0.15  X 0.19  sect.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  212,  lev. 

+ 11.7  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  1974).  Bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  gre.  2.4  across,  0.14  X 0.18  sect.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  129,  lev. 

+ 13-8  ft. 

C37)-  (No.  2924).  Bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  blue.  2.05  across,  0.13  X 0.18  sect.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  198,  lev. 
-f  6.8  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  4429).  Bangle.  Fai.  Lt.  blu.  2.41  across,  0.29  X 0.4  sect.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc. 

15,  lev.  -|-  14.0  ft. 

(39) .  (No.  3865).  Bangle.  Pot.  2.36  across,  0.25  X 0-28  sect.  Trench  Fl(i),  loc.  53,  lev. 

— 1.7  ft. 

(40) .  (No.  1687).  Bangle.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.41  across, 0.43  X 0.44 sect.  Trench G(i), lev. ^ — 4.2ft. 

Plate  XCI.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Cha-pter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  87).  Table.  Pot.  6.0  Ig.  X 3.56  wde.  X 2.9  hi.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 4.7  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  3740).  Table.  Pot.  Cr.  sip,  dk.  rd.'pt.  2.61  Ig.  X i-66  wde.  X 1-09  hi-  Sq.  7/C, 

loc.  98,  lev.  -j-  7.2  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2466).  Ink-pot.  Pot.  1.89  hi.  X 1-68  X i-75  sq.  at  top.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  141,  lev. 

+ 9.8  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  3488).  Comb.  Ivory.  1.79  Ig.  X 2.4  wde.  X 0.2  th.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  205,  lev.  + 7.1  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2457).  Pulley.  Bone.  3-5  Ig.  X 1.42-1.48  di.  Sq.  lo/E,  loc.  230,  lev. 8.8  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  998).  Table.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  Lt.  rd.  dec.  5.7  Ig.  X 4-i9  wde.  X 1-9  hi.  Trench  A(3), 

lev.  — 3.7  ft. 


3i8 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(7) .  (No.  5316).  Table.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  Lt.  rd.  dec.  2.55  Ig.  X wde.  X o-37  hi.  Cut,  sq. 

9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 4.9  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  5193).  Table.  Pot  Cr.  sip.  Dk.  rd.  dec.  Now  5.93  Ig.  X 3-3i  wde.  X t-42.  hi. 

Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  469,  lev.  — 8.5  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  4844).  Stopper.  Pot  1.56  Ig.  X 1-02  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev.  — 2.2  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  5408).  Handle.  Pot.  3.68  Ig.  X 2*67  wde.  X i-o6  th.  Cut,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481, 

lev.  — 20.5  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  157).  Plumb-bob.  Yell.  st.  2.0 Ig.  Trench  B(i),  lev. — 6.6ft. 

(12) .  (No.  3579).  Cyl.  Pas.  3.55%.  X 1.52-1.58  di.  Trench  E(i),  surface. 

(13) .  (No.  355).  Cyl.  Pas.  3.0  Ig.  X 1.22  di.  Trench  C(2),  lev.  — 2.5  ft 

(14) .  (No.  5060).  Door-socket.  Brick.  Now  4.7  X 3-42  X 2.57.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  23, 

lev.  + 14-1  ft- 

(15) .  (No.  4971).  Cut  brick.  9.75  X 2.45  X 2.2.  Sq.  7/F,  loc.  147,  lev.  -f  11.2  ft 

(16) .  (No.  3171).  Net-sinker.  Pot  2.5  X 0.8  X i-o.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  + 6.8  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  4608).  Runnel.  Brick.  11.6  X 5-6  X 2.7.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  410,  lev.  + 9.5  ft 

(18) .  (No.  4609).  Runnel.  Brick.  9.8  X 5-3  X 2.7.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  414,  lev.  -f  4.2  ft. 

(19) .  (No.  1545).  Gutter.  Pot.  22.0  X 5-*  X 3-2.  Trench  H(i),  loc.  51,  lev.  — 10.8  ft. 

(20) .  (No.  4776).  Cyl.  Pas.  Tr.  gre.  gl.  3.9  Ig.  X 1-69  di.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  428,  lev.  — i.i  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  1039).  Plaque.  Pas.  4.2  X 0.9  X0.4.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 8.1  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1187).  Plaque.  Pas.  2.76X0.97X0.4.  Trench  G(i),  lev.  — 2.9  ft 

(23) .  (No.  881).  Pebble  weight  Dk.  gr.  st  1.37  X i-i  X 0.68.  27.19  gms.  Trench  G(i),  loc. 

49,  lev.  — 5.6  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  1072).  Pebble  weight.  Amphibole-schist  Wh.  &B1.  1.74  X o.oi  X 0.6.  30.28  gms. 

Trench  G(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — 7.2  ft 

(25) .  (No.  3169).  Pebble  weight.  Dk.  gr.-gre.  st  1.4  X 0.9  X 0.8.  27.68  gms.  Sq.  9/C,  loc. 

213,  lev.  —4.7  ft 

(26) .  (No.  1095).  Pebble  weight  Amphibole-schist  Wh.&bl.  1.3  X i-o6  X 0.58.  2i.39gms. 

Trench  F(2),  loc.  65,  lev.  — 4.7  ft 

(27) .  (No.  2016).  Weight  Rd.  quartzite.  2.1 1 hi.  X 2.25  di.  273.59  gms.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  187, 

lev.  + 12.7  ft 

(28) .  (No.  2075).  Weight.  Gr.  san.  2.4  hi.  X 2.84  di.  544.77  gms.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  92,  lev. 

+ 17.0  ft 

(29) .  (No.  3189).  Weight  Ch.  1.0X0.98X0.76.  27.53  gms.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  280,  lev. -f  7.0  ft 

(30/.  (No.  2760).  Weight  Ag.  i.o  X i.o  X 0.77.  27.66  gms.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  + 8.8  ft 

(31).  (N0.2867)  Weight  Ch.  I. II  X i.n  X0.6.  27.i4gms.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  127,  lev.  + 8.3 ft 

Weight.  Ag.  0.9  X 0.9  X 0.91.  27.34 gms.  Sq.  6/E,  loc.  431,  lev.  + 10.1  ft 

(33T  (No.  1496).  Curry-stone.  Br.-gr.  san.  18.7  X 7-2  X 6.0.  Trench  A(3),  loc.  36,  lev. 
— 3-4  ft- 


(34) .  (No.  4335). 

(35) -  (No.  2012). 

(36) .  (No.  3563). 

(37) .  (No.  3278). 

(38) -  (No.  2157). 

(39) .  (No.  714). 

(40) .  (No.  1496). 

(41) .  (No.  2158). 

(42) .  (No.  3187). 

(43) -  (No.  1122). 

(44) .  (No.  5095). 

— 2.2  ft 


Palette.  Dk.  hr.  st.  4.91  X i-9  X 0.23.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  408,  lev.  -{“  0.9  ft. 
Mould.  Pot.  1. 41  hi.  X 3-0  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  + 13.0  ft. 

Hone.  Purp.-gr.  san.  4.99  X 1.62  X i-H-  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  393,  lev.  + 7.3  ft 
Hone.  Cr.-col.  san.  4.59  X 1.76  X 0.82.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  + 10.7  ft. 
Hone.  Dk.  gr.  st.  4.4  X 2.0  X i.o8.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  145,  lev.  11.9  ft. 

Hone.  Purp.  san.  5.87  X 2.4  X 1-63.  Trench  D(i),  lev.  — 2.6  ft 
Curry-stone.  Br.-gr.  18.7  X 7-^  X 6.0.  Trench  A(3),  loc.  36,  lev.  —3.4  ft 
Rubber.  Br.  ch.  3-61  X 1.81  X 1.61.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  90,  lev.  13. i ft. 

Palette.  Lt.  yell,  st  Now  4.08  X 1.63  X 0.3.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  280,  lev.  + 7.0  ft 
Mette.  Yell.-br.  st.  4.21  X i-54  X 0.5.  Trench  J(i),  loc.  79,  lev.  — 2.5  ft. 
Hone.  Dk.  gr.  san.  9.28  X 2.72  X 1.2.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/G,  loc.  481,  lev. 


(45) .  (No.  4754)  Round  st  Ch.-lim.  5.22  hi.  X i5-4  di-  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev. 

-}-  14.0  ft. 

(46) .  (No.  4544).  Round  st  Ch.-lim.  6.5  hi.  X 12.62  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  419,  lev.  + 4.6  ft 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 


319 


(47) .  (No.  1139).  Rolling-pin.  Pot.  4.29  Ig.  X 1.29  di.  Trench  G(i),  lev. — 2.9  ft. 

(48) .  (No.  1140).  Rolling-pin.  Pot.  3.3  Ig.  X di.  Trench  G(i),  loc.  49,  lev.  — 2.9  ft. 

(49) .  (No.  1056).  Rolling-pin.  Pot.  3.18  Ig.  X 1.47  di.  Trench  A(3),  loc.  35,  lev.  — 5-9  ft- 

Plate  XCII.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Chapter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  4450).  Bricks  forming  water-chute.  10.75  X 4-75  X 2.-5  & n X 5-5  X 2.25.  Sq. 

lo/D,  loc.  246,  lev.  4-  7-0  ft- 

(2) .  (No.  135).  Drill-head.  Wh.  ch.-lim.  1.5  hi.  X 1.71  di.  Trench  A(i),  lev. — 5-5  ft- 

(3) .  (No.  4687).  Drill-head.  Hard  st.  Bl.  & wh.  2.13  hi.  X i-i3  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  206,  lev. 

+ 6.8  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  4383).  Whorl.  Pot.  1.5  di.  X 0-52-  th.  Cut.,  sq.  10/F,  loc.  421,  lev.  0.5  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  4222).  Whorl.  Pot.  1. 51  di.  X 0-63  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  474,  lev.  -f-  0.8  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  5048).  Bohhin.  Pot.  1.9  di.  X 0.7  th.  Cut.,  sq.  9/F,  loc.  409,  lev.  4"  o-5  ft- 

(7) .  (No.  5071).  Whorl.  Pot.  2.01  di.  X 0-8  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  34,  lev.  4-  14-2  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  4021).  Cut  hrick.  5.73  X 5-36  X 2.5.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  406,  lev.  4-  8.0  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  4367).  Net-weight.  Pot.  3.1  X 2.75  X 1-32.  Sq.  8/B,  loc.  235,  lev. 7.7  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4990).  Drill-socket.  Hard  cr.  col.  st.  1.82  di.  X 0.93  hi.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  421, 

lev.  -f-  0.5  ft. 

(11) .  (No.  4872).  Mace-head.  Unfin.  Ch.-lim.  2.6  di.  X t-95  D-  Mound  I,  sq.  12/J,  loc.  16, 

lev.  4-  1 8-3  ft- 

(12) .  (No.  3128).  Rubber.  Ch.-lim.  2.72  di.  X 3-7  hi-  Sq- 9/E,  loc.  173,  lev. 13.0  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  4589).  Pedestal.  Dk.  rd.  san.  2.03  hi.  X 1-22  X 1-22  at  base.  Mound  I,  sq.  i3/J» 

loc.  2,  lev.  -|-  14.3  ft. 

(14) .  (No.  4565).  Net-weight.  Pot.  2.6  X i-5  X 0.9.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  463,  lev.  4*  6-4  ft- 

(15) .  (No.  4984).  Triangular  plaque.  Purp.  san.  2.93  Ig.  X i-i8  th.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev. 

4-  11.4  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  3144).  Rubber.  Dk.  hr.  san.  2.07  hi.  X 2.03  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  16 1,  lev. 14.2  ft. 

(17) .  (No.  2377).  Coiled  object.  Pot.  1.4  across  X 0.38  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  264,  lev.  4-  lo-o  ft. 

(18) .  (No.  3500).  Round  plaque.  Pot.  3.76  di.  X 2.1  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  287,  lev.  4-  7-i  ft- 

(19) .  (No.  188).  Pestle.  Dk.  gr.  igneous  st.  4.72  hi.  X 2.86  di.  Trench  B(2),  loc.  22,  lev. 

— 5-3  f^- 

(20) .  (No.  5030).  Grating.  Pot.  Now  5.8  Ig.  X 3-7  vvde.  X 0.71  th.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc. 

26,  lev.  -|-  14.0  ft. 

(21) .  (No.  3588).  Triangular  plaque.  Pot.  2.53  Ig.  X 0-78  th.  Trench  E( i ),  lev. — 4.8  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  1308).  Round  stone.  Gr.-br.  col.  ii.85di.  X 4.51  hi.  Trench  H(i),  loc.  51,  lev. 

— 4.4  ft. 

(23) .  (No.  4541).  Round  plaque.  Pot.  2.9  di.  X 0-42  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  iii,  lev.  -j-  7.2  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  2308).  Jar-cover(?).  Pot.  2.7  di.  X 1.72  hi.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  170,  lev.  4-  11.9  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  1357).  Spoon.  Pot.  4.6  Ig.  X 2.89  wde.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev.  -f-  13.5  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  4521).  Triangular  plaque.  Pot.  4.7  Ig.  X 1-09  th.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  258,  lev.  4"  8-5  ft- 

(27) .  (No.  2690).  Stick.  Rd.  oxide.  Now  1.75  Ig.  X 0.58  X o-39-  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  176,  lev. 

-j-  11.2  ft. 

(28) .  (No.  1963).  Awl.  Bone.  4.37  Ig-  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  106,  lev. -f  14.9  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2079).  Awl.  Bone.  4.08  Ig.  X 0.47  wde.  X 0-36  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  181,  lev.  -f-  13. i ft. 

(30) .  (No.  1962).  Awl.  Bone.  3.73  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  130,  lev.  4- 15.0  ft. 

(31) .  (No.  2018).  Awl.  Bone.  3.4  Ig.  X 0.45  wde.  X 0.31  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  106,  lev.  + 13.5  ft. 

(32) .  (No.  2052).  Awl.  Bone.  3.3  Ig.  X 0.31  wde.  X 0-28  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  89,  lev.  4-  12.3  ft. 

(33) .  (No.  1394).  Awl.  Bone.  3.0  Ig.  X o-5  wde.  X 0.35  th.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  95,  lev.  4-  19.3  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  4310).  Cut.  brick.  10.85  Ig.  X 5-4  hi-  X 2.5  th.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  134,  lev.  4-  6.9  ft. 

(35) .  (No.  2027).  Unknown  object.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  2.4  Ig.  2.2  hi.  X 1-03  wde.  Sq.  8/D,  loc. 

138,  lev.  4"  t5-t  R- 

(36) .  (No.  5029).  Pedestal.  Pot.  No  sip.  7.43  di.  X 3-9  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  12/K,  loc.  15,  lev. 

4-  1 4-0  ft. 


320 


CHANHU-DARO  EXCAVATIONS 


(37) -  (No.  1550).  Unknown  object.  Pot.  Cr.  sip.  4.05  Ig.  X i-4  wde.  X 0.73  th.  Sq.  7/C, 

loc.  134,  lev.  16.1  ft. 

(38) .  (No.  3498).  Head-rest.  Pot.  Purp.-bl.  pt.  on  cherry  rd.  sip.  12.3  Ig.  X 7-i  hi.  X i -6-2.4 

Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev.  + 2.9  ft. 

Plate  XCIII.  Miscellaneous  Objects.  Chapter  XIV 

(1) .  (No.  2326,  E).  Lump  of  wh.,  trans.  cry.  2.0  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -f-  10.4  ft. 

(2) .  (No.  2865).  Lump  of  Ameth.  1.9  X i-5  X i-3-  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  124,  lev.  -1-  9.9  ft. 

(3) .  (No.  2381).  Lump  of  Car.  1.92  Ig.  Sq.  7/C,  loc.  237,  lev.  ii.o  ft. 

(4) .  (No.  2189).  Lump  of  Car.  2.9  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  139,  lev.  1 1.6  ft. 

(5) .  (No.  2391,  B).  Mass  of  beads.  Wh.  steat.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  -j-  9.4  ft. 

(6) .  (No.  2326,  F).  Drill.  Lt.  gr.  ch.  2.43  Ig.  X o-4  wde.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev.  10.4  ft. 

(7) .  (No.  2941).  Drill.  Lt.  gr.  ch.  1.4  Ig.  X o-4  wde.  X 0.14  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  85,  lev.  7.4  ft. 

(8) .  (No.  2957).  Drill.  Lt.  br.  ch.  1.5  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0*12.  th.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  255,  lev.  -|-  6.9  ft. 

(9) .  (No.  3564).  Bead-hone.  Lt.  gr.  san.  9.01  Ig.  X 3-95  wde.  X 0.2.  th.  Sq.  8/C,  loc.  393, 

lev.  -f  7.3  ft. 

(No.  2496).  Bead.  Car.  Unfin.  2.48  Ig.  X 0.39  di.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  -j-  9.7  ft. 

(10) .  (No.  4728).  Bead-hone.  Dk.  gr.  san.  12.25  X 4-2.  wde.  X 3-6  th.  Sq.  8/D,  loc.  178, 

lev.  -j-  1 1. 1 ft. 

(11) .  (No.  3013).  Bead-hone.  Dk.  gr.  san.  9.45  Ig.  X 4-03  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  208,  lev.  -j-  9.7  ft. 

(12) .  (No.  4226,  A).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  Br.  1.9  Ig.  X 0.2-0.29  di.  See  PI.  LXXX,  i.  Sq.  9/F, 

loc.  468,  lev.  + 1.3  ft. 

(13) .  (No.  4226,  B).  Bead-tool.  Cop.  or  br.  1.65  Ig.  X 0.2-0. 3 di.  Weighted  at  end  by  fiange 

0.19  Ig.  X 0-3  di.  Point  o.i  di.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  468,  lev.  -j-  1.3  ft. 

(14,  e).  (No.  2479).  Unfin.  bead.  Ag.  Yell,  mottled  with  br.  3.06  Ig.  X 0.69  wde.  X 0.66  th. 

Ends  show  cortex.  Sq.  9/F,  loc.  184,  lev.  -f  10.2  ft. 

(14,  d).  (No.  3084).  Unfin.  bead.  Ag.  Yell.  2.87  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0.39  th.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  150, 
lev.  -f  7.3  ft. 

(14,  c).  (No.  2857).  Unfin.  bead.  Ag.  Yell.  3.63  Ig.  X 0.4  wde.  X 0.35  th.  Sq.  6/F,  loc.  160, 
lev.  + 8.4  ft. 

(14,  b).  (No.  249).  Unfin.  bead.  Ag.  Yell.  3.0  Ig.  X 0.4  di.  Trench  D(i),  loc.  31,  lev.  — 2.3  ft. 
(14,3).  (No.  2673).  Bead.  Car.  Clear  rd.  2.27  Ig.  X 0.41  di.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  131,  lev.  8.2  ft. 

(15) .  (No.  1561).  Bead-hone.  Dk.  gr.  san.  3.2  Ig.  X 2.4  wde.  X 1-31  th.  Sq.  7/E,  loc.  120, 

lev.  -4-13-5  ft. 

(16) .  (No.  3151).  Bead-hone.  Dk.  gr.  san.  9.6  Ig.  Sq.  7/F.  loc.  439,  lev.  + 7-5  ft- 

(17) .  (No.  2326,  U).  Car.  nodule.  3.6  Ig.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. -j- 10.4  ft. 

(18) .  Same  number  and  position. 

(19) .  Same  number  and  position. 

(20) .  Same  number  and  position. 

(21) .  (No.  2128).  Fossil  shell.  Cr.  col.  ch.-lim.  2.71  Ig.  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  83,  lev.  -f-  16.3  ft. 

(22) .  (No.  4619).  Fossil  shell.  Dk.  gr.  st.  1.63  Ig.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  12,  lev.  -f-  16.2ft. 

(23) .  (No.  3844).  Fossil  shell.  Cr.  col.  ch.  2.13  Ig.  X 2.02  di.  Cut.,  sq.  lo/F,  loc.  465,  lev. 

+ 2.4  ft. 

(24) .  (No.  918).  Ribbon  flake.  Lt.  gr.  ch.  4.6  X 0.6  X 0.28.  Trench  B(3),  lev.  — 4.2  ft. 

(25) .  (No.  1031).  Ribbon  flake.  Gr.-br.  ch.  4.7  X 0.58  X 0.19.  Trench  F(i),  lev.  — 5.1  ft. 

(26) .  (No.  804).  Ribbon-flake.  Lt.  gr.  ch.  5.0  X o-5  X 0.21.  Trench  B(5),  lev.  — 3.2  ft. 

(27) .  (No.  3162).  Saw.  Lt.  gr.  ch.  4.07  X 0-6  X o-n-  Sq.  8/F,  loc.  115,  lev.  -j-  6.4ft. 

(28) .  (No.  3012).  Core  as  burnisher.  Gr.  ch.  3.68  X i-3  X 0.9.  Sq.  9/D,  loc.  215,  lev. 

-j-  6.4  ft. 

(29) .  (No.  2862,  A).  Core.  Lt.  br.  ch.  3.27  X 1-09  X 0.46.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  96,  lev.  + 8.4  ft. 

(30) .  (No.  2178).  Frag,  of  dish.  Dk.  gr.  steat.  2.55  Ig.  X 0.23  th.  Sq.  8/E,  loc.  104,  lev. 

-f  12.5  ft. 

(31) .  Bali  girl  carrying  food-stand  upon  her  head. 


321 


CATALOGUE  OF  ILLUSTRATED  OBJECTS 

C32).  (No.  4950).  Mace-head.  Wh.  lim.  2.2  di.  X 0.97  hi.  Cut.,  loc.  407,  lev.  0.6  ft. 

(33) -  (No.  2693).  Mace-head.  Lt.  gr.  lim.  3.88  di.  X I-2.8  hi.  Sq.  9/C,  loc.  228,  lev.  -f-  10.8  ft. 

(34) .  (No.  2972).  Mace-head.  Dk.  gre.  st.  3.88  di.  X i-i  hi.  Sq.  9/E,  loc.  201,  lev.  -[-  9.6  ft. 

(35) -  (No.  1126).  Mace-head.  Lt.  gr.  lim.  2.4  di.  X 2.3  hi.  Trench  A(4),  loc.  69,  lev.  — 5.3  ft. 

(36) .  (No.  5198).  Mace-head.  Purp.-gre.  san.  4.1  di.  X o-77  hi.  Mound  I,  sq.  13/K,  loc.  51, 

level  -j-  12.8  ft. 

Plate  XCIV.  Skull  Burial  (Hara-pfa  Culture).  Chu'pter  XVI 

(1-3).  Views  of  jar  containing  skull  copper  and  bronze  implements,  and  conch  shell.  Mound  II, 
square  7/E,  loc.  324,  lev.  -|-  9.2  feet.  [E.  M.] 

Plate  XCV.  Skull  Burial  {Hara-pf  a Culture).  Chapter  XVI 

(4).  Right  lateral  view  of  skull  as  received  for  study.  [W.  H.  S.] 

(5-9).  Photographs  of  skull  in  facial,  left  lateral,  vertical,  ocipital,  and  basilar  views.  [W.  H.  S.] 

Plate  XCVI.  Skull  Burial  (Harappd  Culture).  Chapter  XVI 

(10-12).  Craniographic  drawings  in  facial  left  lateral,  and  vertical  views.  [W.  M.  K.] 


INDEX 


Ablution  places,  14,  47,  62. 

Abrasives,  quartz,  179;  sandstone,  229;  use  on  beads, 
211-214;  use  with  saw,  21 1. 

Acacia  tree,  pictured  on  pottery,  93,  118. 

Adzes,  copper  and  bronze,  35,  48,  49,  179. 

Afghanistan,  possible  source  of  copper  ores,  174. 

Agate,  beads  of,  200,  204,  206,  210,  21 1,  214;  conver- 
sion into  camelian,  214;  heat  treatment  of,  52, 
214;  nodules  of,  50,  52,  179,  209,  214;  weights  of, 
226,  227,  242. 

Agricultural  produce,  transport  of,  162. 

Ahmadabad,  source  of  Amazonite,  209. 

Alabaster,  mace-head  of,  224;  use  of  drills  on,  186;  use 
of  saw  on,  179. 

Alishar,  crania,  256,  262. 

Alkali,  use  on  beads,  200-201;  on  steatite,  148. 

Alloy,  174. 

Alluvium,  12,  18,  66,  252. 

Altars,  73. 

Al-‘Ubaid,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  1 20-1 22,  124, 
125,  127,  129;  drain-pipe  from,  216. 

Amazonite,  heads  of,  202,  203,  209;  sources  of,  209. 

American  archaeological  expedition  to  India,  v. 

American  School  of  Indie  and  Iranian  Studies,  252. 

Amethyst,  lump  for  bead-making,  49,  52,  209,  212. 

Ammonite  shells,  71;  imitations  of,  223;  as  motif  on 
pottery,  204. 

Amphibole-schist,  weights  of,  226. 

Amri  cultiue,  9,  6;;  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  loi, 
102,  117,  124,  128-130;  dating  of,  ix;  people  of, 
128;  village  of,  65. 

Amulets,  33,  48,  49,  124,  126,  144;  cases  contained  in, 
196-197;  clays  used  for,  143-144;  of  faience,  19, 
26,  27,  48-49,  140,  141,  143,  149,  208;  handled, 

32,  48,  140-141;  of  Harappa  culture,  91,  97,  99, 
124,  126,  145-150,  233;  home  manufacture,  141; 
inscribed,  143,  145,  149;  of  Jhukar  culture,  25, 

33,  48,  140-145,  189,  208,  252;  of  metal,  143; 
moulds  for,  149;  of  pottery,  19,  20,  25,  27,  29, 
30,  33,  48.  140,  142,  143-144,  149,  196,  203; 
of  stone,  19,  20,  25,  140-143,  148. 

Anatolia,  pottery  of,  72,  96;  seals  of,  96. 

Anau,  model  vehicles  from,  164;  pins  from,  195;  crania 
from,  256,  262. 

Animals,  bones  of,  234,  246,  248;  clay  composite  figures 
of,  158;  domestic,  61,  90,  165,  222,  246;  fabulous, 
148;  clay  figures  of,  4,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  14,  15,  19, 
21,  33,  39,  40,  41,  44,  45,  49,  5°,  53-58,  155-161, 
165,  166;  figured  on  pottery,  88-90,  91,  93,  96,  98, 
102,  117,  123,  125,  126,  130;  figured  on  seals  and 
amulets,  lot,  142,  144,  145-148,  150,  156,  157, 
159;  figures  with  moveable  parts,  163,  165-166; 
figures  on  wheels,  50,  54,  55,  159,  163,  165,  166; 
hones  in  form  of,  44,  50,  214;  modelling  and 
method  of  manufacture  of  figures  of,  159,  166; 


paints  and  slips  used  on  models  of,  155,  156,  157, 
158-161,  166,  167. 

Antelopes,  models  of,  4,  39,  49,  159;  pictured  on  pot- 
tery, 90;  on  seal-amulet,  142. 

Antimony,  251. 

Antlers,  of  deer,  27,  33,  49,  53,  246,  248. 

Archaeological  Chemist  in  India,  viii,  175. 

Archaeological  Institute  of  America,  239. 

Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  v,  vii,  viii. 

Armlets,  191. 

Arms,  of  figurines,  154,  155. 

Arpachiyah,  painted  pottery  of,  94,  96,  97,  100,  119, 
122,  125,  127;  potters  of.  127. 

Arrow-heads  in  copper  or  bronze,  9,  55-57,  183,  184; 
from  Ghazi-Shah,  184;  in  iron,  189;  tangs  of,  183, 
184. 

Artisans,  15,  38,  40,  48,  49,  52-53,  174,  175,  190,  214, 
243. 

Aryans,  65. 

Ash,  layer  of,  18,  48,  235;  remains  of,  14,  24,  25,  251. 

Ashur,  205. 

Ashur-bani-pal,  95. 

Asia  Minor,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  111. 

Ass,  as  draught  animal,  165;  possible  figures  of,  157. 

Assyria,  beads  of,  205;  comparisons  with  wares  of,  95, 
100,  111,  117,  119,  120,  129. 

Astrabad  treasure,  188. 

Attitudes,  of  figurines,  152,  154. 

Awls,  of  bone,  25-27,  234;  of  copper  or  bronze,  3,  4, 
21,  185. 

Axes,  clay  models  of,  56,  221-222;  of  copper  and  bronze, 
14,  31,  41,  44,  56,  63,  176,  178,  179;  inscriptions 
on,  178;  socketed,  30,  188-189;  types  of,  178. 

Axles,  of  model  vehicles,  162,  163. 

Azidirachta  Indica,  93. 

Babylon,  188,  206. 

Badakshan,  source  of  lapis-lazuli,  209. 

Badari,  beads  from,  205. 

Badarian  culture,  arrow-heads  of,  183. 

Badges  of  office,  worn  by  figurines,  1 54. 

Baking  of  pottery,  67,  86,  104,  112,  133,  223. 

Balances,  beams  of,  53,  57,  178,  185;  pans  of,  178,  243; 
use  of,  for  beads,  212. 

Bale,  sealing  for,  149. 

Bali,  island  of,  74;  use  of  food-stands  in,  74. 

Ball  and  stem  motif  on  pottery,  101,  119,  130. 

Balls,  carved  shell,  28,  43;  limestone,  168;  pottery,  21, 
35,  168,  173;  shell,  28,  43,  53,  168;  use  as  rattles, 
7,  9,  20,  33,  54,  56,  63,  167. 

Baluchistan,  v;  bead  motifs  on  pottery  of,  124;  borders 
of,  230;  burial  pottery  of,  97,  126,  130,  134,  143; 
comparisons  with  painted  wares  of,  117-121,  122, 
124,  126,  130,  132,  134,  137,  143;  comparisons 
with  Jhukar  wares,  109,  126,  129-130;  connections 


323 


324 


INDEX 


with,  112,  130,  189;  copper  seals  from,  143; 
designs  on  pottery  of,  69,  71,  81,  85,  90,  91,  96, 
97,  100,  117-120,  121-122,  124,  126,  130;  figurines 
of,  152;  home  of  wild  goat,  90;  relationship  to 
other  wares,  131;  as  source  of  copper,  174;  as 
trade  route,  189,  195;  use  of  bronze  in,  175. 

Bands  (red),  as  decorative  feature  on  pottery,  106,  107, 
110,  114,  ti6,  117,  121,  128,  129,  136,  138. 

Bangles,  of  copper  and  bronze,  31,  43,  50,  176,  190, 
191,  210;  of  faience,  11,  35,  56,  58,  60,  191,  192; 
finger-impressed,  193;  multiple  type,  46,  154,  192; 
patterns  on,  191,  192;  of  pottery,  10,  11,  35,  46, 
5I)  57>  I54>  I92‘-I93.  2.42;  repairs  to,  192;  of  shell, 
48,  53,  192,  231,  232;  slips  on,  193;  of  vitreous 
paste,  191;  worn  by  figurines,  154. 

Barbs,  of  arrow-heads,  183;  of  fish-hooks,  184. 

Bars,  of  agate,  179,  211. 

Basalt,  pesde  of,  229;  use  in  pottery,  219. 

Basketry,  patterns  derived  from,  97,  loi,  119,  147,  148. 

Baths  and  bathrooms,  38-41,  51,  62,  216,  218. 

Batter,  of  walls,  2,  5,  31. 

Beads,  viii,  154,  199-214;  of  agate,  200,  204,  206,  208, 

210,  211,  214;  Amazonite,  202,  203,  209;  amulets 
in  form  of,  31,  48,  140,  142,  143,  208;  analyses  of, 
213;  balances  for,  212;  blanks  for,  210;  boring  of, 
199,  201,  2 1 0-2 1 2;  of  breccia,  204,  209;  of  car- 
nehan,  23,  54,  55,  57.  58,  199-204,  206,  208,  210, 

211,  213,  214,  243;  carved,  205;  chalcedony,  209; 
of  coiled  wire,  22,  203;  colouring  of,  204,  207; 
comparisons  with  Cretan  beads,  205;  of  copper  or 
bronze,  22,  190,  199,  203,  209,  210,  243;  covered 
with  gold  foil,  190,  210;  cowries,  207;  crystal,  52, 
57,  209;  cylindrical,  22,  199,  203-204,  210;  deco- 
rated, 54,  55,  57,  58,  199-202,  207,  208,  243: 
disc-shaped,  41,  204,  209;  drills  for,  15,  40,  4*,  43, 
48,  49,  52,  57,  58,  210-213,  230;  of  Egypt,  205, 
206,  213;  factory  of,  41-44,  45,  210,  226,  243,244; 
of  faience,  199-208,  210,  213;  finishing  of,  206, 
211-214;  firing  of,  204;  flaking  of,  211,  214;  forms 
of,  204,  207;  fossil  used  for,  204,  231;  of  fuchsite- 
quartzite,  209;  girdles  of,  202,  213;  glazing  of,  25, 
42,  53,  198,  203,  205,  207;  globular,  23;  grinding 
of,  210;  of  haematite,  209;  from  Harappa,  200, 213; 
heat  treatment  of,  213;  hones  for,  28,  34,  40,  45, 
56,  210,  21 1,  213,  214,  227;  of  hornblende,  202, 
204,  209;  incised,  206-208;  imitation  camelian, 
203,  204,  206;  inlaid,  205;  of  jasper,  203,  204, 
209;  of  Jhangar  period,  23,  208;  of  lapis-lazuli, 

203,  207,  209,  213,  243;  of  hmestone,  204,  209; 
makers  of,  15,  187,  209;  manufacture  of,  49,  52, 
53,  191,  210-214,  226;  mass  production  of,  205; 
materials  for,  22,  23,  53,  54,  57,  190,  199-211, 
213,  214,  231,  243;  micro-photographs  of,  210-213; 
of  minute  form,  42,  203,  210,  212,  213,  244; 
mother-of-pearl,  205,  209;  motifs  on,  201-202,  205, 
207;  as  motifs  on  pottery,  loi,  124;  moulding  of, 

204,  207,  210;  from  Mound  I,  207;  natural  shells 
used  for,  207-208,  231;  necklaces  of,  203;  of  onyx, 
204,  206,  209;  painted,  200,  201;  pendants,  13, 
190,  198,  202-203,  209,  231;  from  Persia,  200, 
205;  of  plasma,  209;  polishing  of,  208,  211;  of  pot- 
tery, 202-206,  208;  of  quartz,  204,  209;  raw  mate- 
rials for,  50,  52,  57,  209-210,  211,  212,  214,  243; 
re-use  of,  200;  segmented,  205;  shaping  of,  210, 


211;  of  shell,  53,  204,  205,  207,  209,  231;  slips  on, 
203,  206;  spectographic  analysis  of,  213;  steatite, 
41,  42,  186,  187,  199,  204,  205,  206,  208,  209- 
210,  212,  213;  from  Sumer,  201,  202,  203,  205, 
212,  213;  from  Tepe  Hissar,  200,  205;  terminal, 
202,  207;  tools  used  for  making,  34,  40,  45,  56, 
57,  186-187,  210-212,  213,  214,  243;  treatment 
with  alkali,  200-201;  trefoil  motif  on,  205;  tubular, 
199,  203;  types  of,  199-214;  unfinished,  15,  41,  42, 
44,  46,  52,  203,  204-206,  209-214,  243;  use  of  saw 
on,  179,  209,  211,  230;  use  with  metal  ornaments, 
198;  of  vitreous  paste,  203,  206;  wafer,  53,  186, 
205,  209,  212;  wire,  22,  203;  workshops  for,  46, 
49,  50,  205,  209,  210,  213,  214,  231,  243,  244; 
from  Ur,  200,  201,  202,  205,  213. 

Beams,  of  balances,  53,  57,  178,  185;  for  roofing,  60; 
supports  for,  32;  of  yokes,  156. 

Beards,  on  human-headed  figures,  158;  worn  by  figu- 
rines, 153. 

Bench,  30,  229. 

Bengal,  use  of  solar  emblems  in,  95. 

Bhils,  tribe  of,  133. 

Bibliography  on  skull,  259-260. 

Bihar,  source  of  Amazonite,  209. 

Bins,  3,  4,  30,  31,  33,  44,  47. 

Bird-chariots,  geographical  range  of,  160;  in  pottery, 
160,  163,  166. 

Birds,  bones  of,  234;  cages  of,  77,  92;  model  in  bronze, 
161;  model  in  paste,  35,  160;  models  in  pottery, 
7-9,  11,  36,  39,  40,  159-161;  represented  on 
pottery,  88,  89,  91,  92,  93,  98,  102,  136;  whistles 
in  shape  of,  45,  167. 

Bison,  appearance  on  seals,  147,  157. 

Bitumen,  as  filling,  191. 

Black  powders,  as  cosmetic,  77,  134,  250-251. 

Black  slips,  66,  74,  76,  80,  172,  208,  220. 

Black  wares,  23,  132-138,  140,  143. 

Blade-axes,  14,  31,  41,  44,  56,  63,  176,  178,  179; 
inscriptions  on,  178;  types  of,  178. 

Boar,  model  in  pottery,  158. 

Board-games,  170. 

Bobbin-shaped  objects,  in  pottery,  19,  20,  25,  26,  34, 
170-171. 

Bodhisattva,  saying  of,  241. 

Bohiyun,  v. 

Bolas  balls,  168. 

Bone,  awls  of,  25-27,  234;  implements  of,  54,  86,  234; 
knuckle-,  26,  36,  170;  paddle,  54,  234;  polisher, 
133;  pulley,  58;  roller,  234;  working  of,  53. 

Bones,  of  animals,  246,  248;  human,  85,  252,  253. 

Border  patterns,  on  pottery,  80,  89,  95,  96,  101,  ti8, 
120,  125,  126,  127,  129. 

Bosnia,  pottery  of,  111. 

Boston  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  239-241,  242,  243,  244, 
247,  252. 

Bow-lathe,  211,  212. 

Bowls,  footed,  9,  25,  no,  lit;  of  copper,  177;  of 
pottery,  3,  5,  14,  19,  20,  21,  25,  26,  27,  33-36, 
53,  54,  55-57,  58,  66,  68,  78,  80,  86,  88;  of 
steatite,  32,  138. 

Bow-slings,  for  pellets,  168. 

Bracelets,  see  Bangles. 

Brahmani  bulls,  156. 

Brahui  diggers,  vii,  1;  language  of,  vii. 


INDEX 


3^5 


Brak,  Tell,  94. 

Brands,  for  catde,  201. 

Braziers,  82-83. 

Bread,  utensils  for,  86,  1 14;  making  of,  72,  220. 

Breasts,  of  female  figures,  155. 

Breccia,  204,  209. 

Bricks,  arrangement  of,  39,  46,  47,  50,  60,  61;  batter 
of,  2,  5,  31;  bench  of,  30;  bins  of,  3,  4,  30,  31, 
33,  44,  47;  carved,  23,  138;  columns  of,  13,  15, 
49,  51;  curved,  3,  4;  destruction  of,  i,  17,  18; 
with  imprint  of  animal’s  feet,  222;  joints  of,  32; 
over-baked,  i;  pit  of,  7,  62;  robbing  of,  ix,  8,  23, 
33>  34.  38,  40,  45.  46.  47.  5°.  5t.  6°.  62,  103, 
132,  189;  sawn,  48,  53,  58,  218;  sizes  of,  i,  3,  4, 
5,  7,  8,  15,  16,  17,  23,  24,  34,  38,  47,  49,  50,  60, 
61;  skirting  for  pavement,  6,  15,  38,  41,  49,  50, 
62;  sun-dried,  4,  7,  38,  48,  52;  wedge-shaped,  4, 
17;  use  of  baked  and  unbaked  together,  7;  use  as 
door-socket,  61,  217;  use  as  head-rests,  220;  use  as 
runnels,  39,  56,  58,  216-217,  218;  use  for  special 
purposes,  217,  218. 

Brisdes,  on  elephant,  147. 

British  Isles,  183. 

British  Museum,  Mineral  Department,  213. 

Bronze,  as  accidental  alloy,  174;  adzes,  48,  49,  179; 
blade-axes,  14,  31,  41,  56,  63,  178,  179;  carts,  39, 
41,  52,  164;  castings  of,  41,  52,  56,  174,  175,  177, 
180,  186,  187,  188;  chisels,  56,  57,  58,  64,  184; 
cleaning  of,  175;  and  copper  implements  and 
utensils,  3,  51,  86,  139,  174-189,  214,  253;  cos- 
metic jar,  3,  31,  139,  177;  daggers  of,  180;  division 
of,  viii;  in  Egypt,  174;  figure  of  dove,  161;  games- 
man,  169;  hoards  of,  40,  41,  43,  51,  52,  55,  56, 
85.  86,  175-176.  178,  194.  195.  209.  253;  per- 
centages of  tin  in,  174,  175;  pans  of,  176;  patterns 
on,  196;  pins,  194-196;  platters  of,  177;  preparation 
of,  175;  samples  from  Gatti,  175;  samples  from 
Zangian-damb,  175;  toys  made  of,  39,  41,  52,  164- 
165,  169;  weights,  244. 

Brown  slips  and  paints,  67,  79,  85,  86,  107,  136,  172. 

Brushes,  vi,  107,  201,  223. 

Brushwood,  as  fuel  for  pottery,  104. 

Bucrania,  represented  on  pottery,  126,  127,  129. 

Buff  slips,  67. 

Buildings,  alignment  of,  vii,  12,  13,  16,  24;  below  sub- 
soil water,  65;  of  Jhangar  Culture,  133;  at  Jhukar, 
103. 

Bulgaria,  195. 

Bullae,  imitation  leather  cases,  35,  45,  53,  54,  196-197. 

Bulls,  bones  of,  246;  Brahmani  type,  1 56;  pottery  figures 
of,  10,  II,  14,  19,  1 55-1 57,  165,  166;  on  seals,  142, 
147;  sports  with,  157. 

Burial  deposits,  in  Baluchistan,  92,  97,  126,  130,  134, 
143- 

Burials,  of  late  date,  v-vi,  2,  4,  23,  132,  137,  138. 

Burma,  as  source  of  tin,  174. 

Buttons,  of  Egypt,  96;  faience,  26,  63,  197;  materials 
made  from,  197;  moulds  for,  197;  pottery,  10; 
shell,  197;  types  of,  197. 

Buttresses,  5,  14,  30,  32,  60. 


Cages,  9,  56,  77,  92,  98,  1 01. 

Cakes,  models  of,  ii,  57,  58,  69,  135,  209,  223. 


Calcite  weights,  242. 

Camphor,  as  incense,  83. 

Camping  sites,  133. 

Cane  stands,  98. 

Canister,  of  copper,  43,  176. 

Canopies,  over  vehicles,  163,  164. 

Cappadocia,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  93;  designs 
on  amulets  of,  144;  art  of,  96. 

Caravans,  v. 

Carbonate  of  soda,  use  as  paint  on  beads,  200. 

Carinated  pottery,  75,  77,  78,  82,  133. 

Camelian  beads,  202,  204,  206,  208,  210,  21 1,  213,  214, 
243;  decorated,  54,  55,  57,  58,  199-202,  243;  ex- 
perimental drilling  of,  21 1;  imitations  of,  203,  204, 
206;  manufacture  of,  210;  nodules  for,  43,  52,  179, 
209,  212,  214,  243;  shapes  of,  202;  types  of,  199- 
202. 

Carpenters,  52. 

Carthage,  razors  of,  183. 

Carts  and  vehicles,  bronze  models  of,  39,  41,  52,  164- 
165;  four-wheeled,  163,  164,  165;  likened  to 
modem  vehicles,  156,  165;  pottery  models  of,  3, 
9,  15,  21,  35,  56,  135,  152,  162-164;  wheels  of, 
9,  10,  II,  50,  60,  156,  162-164,  165-166;  types  of, 
162-164.  See  also  bird  and  ram  chariots. 

Carved  beads,  205. 

Carved  bricks,  23,  138. 

Carving,  of  beads,  205;  of  bricks,  23;  of  shell  objects, 
28,  43,  233. 

Castings,  40,  41,  52,  56,  174,  175,  180,  185,  187,  188; 
of  metal  utensils,  176;  of  spear-head,  180;  of  stave- 
heads,  187;  unfinished,  175,  177. 

Cat,  imprint  of  feet  on  brick,  222. 

Catalogue  of  illustrated  objects,  269-321. 

Cattle,  Brahmani,  156;  differences  in  breed,  157; 
draught,  156;  grey,  156. 

Caucasic  physical  type,  257,  259. 

Caucasus,  pins  from,  195. 

Cavities  in  drills,  21 1,  225;  for  inlay,  169;  in  jar  covers, 
81;  in  mace  heads,  224-225;  in  pavements,  13;  in 
pedestal,  218;  in  stone,  229. 

Cements,  on  beads,  202;  on  handles,  181,  224;  for  shell 
inlay,  230;  use  on  stone,  228. 

Central  Asian  Museum,  New  Delhi,  240. 

Centre-bits,  225. 

Ceremonial  staves,  157,  187. 

Cess  jars,  6,  39,  40,  42,  45,  48,  49,  51,  85,  216. 

Cess  pits,  2,  3,  4,  30,  34,  45,  62,  216. 

Ceylon,  treatment  of  pottery  in,  135. 

Chagar  Bazar,  94,  119. 

Chalcedony,  beads  of,  209;  weights  of,  242. 

Chalice  forms  of  pottery,  no,  in. 

Chanhiyun,  v. 

Chanhu-daro,  derivation  of  name,  v;  desertion  of,  71, 
243;  planning  of,  38-39;  position  of,  v;  later  in- 
habitants, 63. 

Chapatis,  220. 

Charcoal,  use  as  eye-paint,  251. 

Chatal  Hiiyuk,  259. 

Chauro-Landi,  painted  pottery  of,  128. 

Chemical  Adviser  to  Government  of  Egypt,  250. 

Chequer  patterns,  on  pottery,  97,  107,  in,  129. 

Chert,  cores  of,  43,  230;  drills  made  from,  15,  40,  41, 
43.  48.  49.  52.  57.  58.  210-213,  230;  saw  of,  56, 


326 


INDEX 


230;  use  of  flakes  as  knives,  230;  weights  of,  227, 
236,  241,  244. 

Chevron  patterns,  on  bangles,  192;  on  beads,  201;  on 
button,  197;  on  glazed  vessel,  139;  on  metal  pins, 
195,  196;  on  pottery,  119,  133,  134,  139;  in  two 
colours  on  pottery,  119. 

China,  bead  design,  200,  model  chariots,  160;  pentacle 
design,  69;  solar  symbol,  96. 

Chisels,  of  copper  or  bronze,  10,  20,  32,  34,  36,  43,  49, 
5°)  53>  54>  56-58,  64,  176,  189;  edges  of,  185; 
-marks  on  stone,  229;  tangs  of,  184;  types  of,  184. 

Chutes  (water),  5,  16,  218. 

Cilicia,  painted  pottery  of,  124. 

Circle  patterns,  on  balls,  168;  use  on  dice,  171;  use  in 
Egypt,  95;  use  on  pin,  196;  use  on  Trihni  wares, 
137- 

Circular  pavements,  13,  50-51. 

Clays,  for  amulets  and  impressions,  149- 150;  for  bangles, 
193;  and  clay  decoration  for  figurines,  154,  155- 
156,  158,  159,  161,  166;  drab-coloured,  66,  104, 
1 13,  1 14,  1 16,  144,  170,  173,  223;  for  pellets  in 
rattles,  167;  for  pottery,  66,  104,  133-134,  135, 
138;  sealings,  150;  tablets,  69.  See  also  Tempering. 

Clothing,  ornaments  worn  on,  196,  197;  worn  by  figu- 
rines, 153,  154. 

Cobalt,  use  as  paint  on  beads,  200. 

Coil-headed  pins,  ix,  21,  28,  194-195. 

Coil  patterns,  142;  on  amulets,  142,  144. 

Coins,  69,  95,  201,  240. 

Collars,  worn  by  figurines,  153,  154,  167. 

Colours,  on  Amri  wares,  117,  128;  on  Baluchistan 
wares,  130,  132;  on  Harappa  wares,  66,  67,  72, 
84,  86,  87,  88-89,  94>  104!  on  Jhangar  wares, 
132;  on  Jhukar  wares,  103,  105-107,  118-120,  128- 
129,  130;  on  Trihni  wares,  117,  135-137. 

Columella  (of  shells),  use  for  various  objects,  168,  231. 

Columns  (brick),  13,  15,  49,  51. 

Comb,  196;  motif  on  pottery,  98;  possible  veneration  of, 
98. 

Combed  ware,  98,  108. 

Composite  animals,  on  amulets,  142,  148;  in  pottery, 
158. 

Compressed  steatite,  209-210. 

Concentric  circle  patterns,  on  pottery,  80,  81,  iii,  168, 
171,  2or. 

Conch  shell,  252-253. 

Cones,  171-173;  bases  of,  172-173;  damage  to  points  of, 
172-173;  in  faience,  30,  198;  as  gamesmen,  171, 
172;  as  head  gear,  198,  208,  232;  incised,  171- 
173;  materials  made  of,  173;  painted,  172,  173;  of 
pttery,  3,  5-6,  9-11,  26,  54,  57,  58,  64,  171-173; 
in  shell,  28,  41,  43,  49,  54,  171-173,  198,  232; 
slips  on,  172,  173;  types  of,  171,  172;  -shaped 
objects  on  pottery,  91,  99. 

Conjoined  tiger  figures,  on  seal-amulets  and  sealings, 
147- 

Connections  by  trade,  71,  129,  130,  143,  175. 

Convolvulus  flowers,  imitation  of,  in  metal,  199;  as 
pottery  design,  77. 

Copper  and  Bronze,  beads  of,  22,  190,  199,  203,  209, 
210,  243;  cleaning  of,  175;  fillet,  194;  groups  of, 
40,  41,  43,  51,  52,  55,  56,  85,  86,  175-176,  178, 
194,  195,  209,  253;  ores  of,  174,  175;  ornaments 
in,  55,  190,  198,  199;  pins  of,  21,  26-28,  31,  33, 


43,  176,  185,  189,  194-196;  scale-pans,  178,  243; 
seals  of,  142,  143;  sources  of,  174;  vessels  of,  29, 
31,  48,  79,  176-178,  212;  tablets,  91,  146. 

Corbel  masonry,  23,  62. 

Cordoned  jars,  85,  109,  112. 

Cords,  as  fastenings  for  mace-heads,  224;  for  razors,  182; 
for  spearheads,  180;  markings  on  pottery,  109,  112; 
use  on  drain-pipes,  216;  use  on  model  animals, 
166;  use  by  potter,  68,  76,  88,  104,  tit,  116,  139, 
178;  use  with  seal-amulets,  145;  worn  by  figurines, 

154- 

Cores,  of  chert,  43;  of  pottery  vessels,  104;  of  ratdes, 
167. 

Corrugated  ware,  10,  13,  82,  86,  109,  114. 

Cosmetics,  77,  84,  134,  139,  177,  186,  232,  250,  251; 
bronze  jars  for,  31,  139,  177;  faience  jar  for,  139; 
pottery  jars  for,  4,  6,  7,  9,  11,  16,  20,  35,  41,  55, 
56,  58,  68,  77,  122,  132-134,  139,  250-251;  soot 
used  as,  77,  134,  250-251;  spoon  for,  232. 

Cotton,  vi;  cloth  impressed  on  metal,  185. 

Courtyards,  5,  30-31,  32,  33,  41,  43,  44,  47,  60. 

Cowries,  use  as  beads,  207. 

Cows,  not  represented  in  clay  or  on  painted  wares,  156. 

Crafts,  ix,  63;  bead-making,  15,  42,  43,  44,  46,  49,  50, 

52,  53,  191,  210-214,  226,  243;  glazing,  25,  42, 

53,  63;  idol-making,  152;  metal-working,  40,  43, 
52,  175;  shell-working,  28,  43,  53,  192;  stone- 
working, 48,  52,  63,  179;  weight-making,  48,  226. 

Crescent-shaped  horns,  156;  motifs,  on  pottery,  71,  78, 
122,  123. 

Crests,  of  birds,  92. 

Crete,  beads  of,  205;  bull  sports  in,  157;  figurines  of, 
152;  double-axe  motif  in,  69-70,  100;  drain-pipes 
of,  216;  Mother-Goddess  of,  161;  pottery  and  de- 
signs of.  111,  123,  126,  202;  sanctity  of  dove  in, 
161;  seals  of,  96,  100,  119. 

Crickets,  cages  for,  9,  56,  77. 

Criss-cross  motifs,  89,  90,  too,  101,  119,  120,  121,  125, 
127,  129,  134,  138. 

Crocodile,  as  emblem  of  river  Indus,  233;  carved  on 
shell,  233;  pictured  on  amulets,  149. 

Crucibles,  for  firing  agates,  214. 

Cruciform  motifs,  on  amulets,  146;  on  pottery,  99-100, 
108,  123-124;  as  pot-mark,  108. 

Crystal,  beads  of,  57,  209;  lumps  of,  57,  212,  243. 

Cube  W'eights,  226,  236,  239,  242,  244,  247. 

Cult  objects,  69,  101,  146-148,  156,  158,  218,  233. 

Cultures,  terminology  of,  viii,  ix;  overlapping  of,  ix. 

Cups,  in  fuchsite,  209;  handled,  8,  9,  10,  22,  54,  82; 
of  pottery,  8,  56,  74,  75,  79,  87,  111,  116. 

Curios,  ix;  shells  kept  as,  14,  230. 

Curry-stones,  2,  227-228. 

Cut  bricks,  48,  53,  58,  218. 

Cutting  (Great),  9,  12-22,  37,  52,  65,  103,  108,  112, 
149,  150.  155,  157,  185,  196;  description  of,  12- 
22,  157;  objects  from,  203,  212,  220,  222,  223, 
230,  233. 

Cut  wares,  57,  73,  98,  220;  of  Sumer,  98. 

Cyclades,  spear  heads  of,  i8o;  sun  symbol,  96. 

Cylinders,  beads,  22,  199,  203-204,  210;  of  paste,  10, 
20,  48,  234-235;  of  pottery,  2,  7,  11,  220-221;  of 
stone,  60,  228,  229. 

Cyprus,  figurines  of,  152;  spear-beads  of,  180. 


INDEX 


Daggers,  180,  222. 

Damage  to  buildings  by  floods,  2,  12,  13-15,  29-32,  34, 
46,  49,  61. 

Damb  Buthi,  comparisons  with  pottery  from,  126,  130. 

Damin,  comparisons  with  wares  of,  120. 

Danube  basin,  96;  Corridor,  arrow-heads  of,  183. 

Dating,  7,  155. 

Datum-level,  position  of,  vi,  i,  19;  subsoil  water  below, 
12,  19. 

Debris,  foundations  on,  28,  37,  39,  42,  63;  layers 
between  occupations,  34,  37. 

Decorated  carnelian  beads,  54,  55,  57,  58,  199-202,  208, 
243;  types  of,  199-202. 

Decoration,  of  pottery,  see  Motifs;  of  pavements,  95; 
of  toilet  tables,  219. 

Deer,  antlers  of,  27,  33,  49,  53,  246,  248;  hog  variety, 
246,  248;  sambar,  53,  246,  248. 

Degraissants,  use  W’ith  figurines,  155;  use  w'ith  pottery, 
66,  104,  133-135,  138,  2.19- 

Deities,  69,  92;  hair  of,  98;  household,  152;  Mother- 
Goddess  figures,  69,  151-152,  161;  representations 
of,  151-152,  155,  161;  parts  of,  233;  Semitic,  161. 

Delhi,  Imperial  Institute  of  Agricultural  Research,  250. 

Denmark,  comparisons  with  ancient  razors  from,  183. 

Denudation  of  masonry,  5,  6,  7,  18,  27,  34,  60,  136,  143. 

Department  of  Mineralogy,  Harvard  University,  242. 

Designs  on  pottery  wares,  see  Motifs. 

Dice,  10,  58,  171. 

Director  General  of  Archaeology  in  India,  viii. 

Dishes,  of  food-stands,  5,  13,  15,  17,  35,  39,  4i>  65,  67, 
70,  71,  74-75,  80,  106,  109,  116-117,  119.  121, 
122,  130,  204;  re-use  of,  74;  incised,  57,  65,  71, 
75,  no;  oval,  87;  shell,  33,  35,  40,  43,  45,  53,  54> 
232;  stone,  32,  55,  138,  231;  with  two  compart- 
ments, 45,  84. 

Distribution  of  units  of  weights,  237,  239. 

Divergent  weights,  236,  237. 

Division  of  finds,  viii. 

Dogs,  clay  figures  of,  7,  158,  159;  breeds  of,  159; 
imprint  of  feet  on  brick,  222. 

Domestic  animals,  61,  90,  142,  156,  157,  222,  246. 

Donkeys,  clay  figures  of  (?),  157. 

Doors  and  doorways,  13,  14,  16,  24,  31,  32,  33,  41,  42, 
44,  45,  47,  48,  49,  51,  59,  60,  61,  62;  blocking 
of,  4,  29,  30,  41,  47;  jambs  of,  4,  14,  16,  32,  42, 
43,  47,  48,  52,  59,  60;  sills  of,  4,  16,  29,  30,  32, 
41,  42,  43,  44,  48,  60:  sizes  of,  32,  41,  42,  47, 
49,  52,  61;  -sockets,  8,  61,  217,  229. 

Dough,  preparation  of,  227. 

Dowel-holes,  218. 

Doves,  clay  figures  of,  2,  7-9,  ii,  39,  160,  161;  bronze 
figure  of,  16 1 ; as  emblem  of  Mother-Goddess,  151, 
161;  as  sacred  birds,  1 5 1 , 1 6 1 . 

Drab  wares,  66,  104,  113,  114,  116,  144,  170,  173,2.23- 

Drains  and  drainage  systems,  3,  5,  6-7,  8,  15,  16,  33, 
38,  39,  45-48,  50,  59,  61,  62,  63,  85;  dimensions 
of,  2,  3,  5,  8;  subsidences  of,  46,  61,  243;  vertical 
channels,  5,  16. 

Drain-pipes,  3,  8,  35,  41,  46,  53,  57,  215-216,  217; 
finish  of,  216;  types  of,  215. 

Draughtsmen,  see  Gam.esmen. 

Dress,  on  figurines,  152,  154,  164. 

Drills,  breakages  of,  212;  flake  type,  41,  43,  213;  of 
flint,  15,  40,  41,  43,  48,  49,  50,  52,  57,  58,  210- 


327 

213,  230;  of  metal,  55,  186;  tubular,  55,  186,  225; 
use  on  mace-heads,  225;  use  on  pins,  196;  use  on 
seal-amulets,  146;  wear  on,  212;  use  on  stone,  186. 

Drill-heads,  9,  13,  50,  57,  225. 

Drivers  of  model  vehicles,  152,  163,  164. 

Druggist  shop,  53. 

Ducks,  clay  models  of,  40,  1 36,  1 59;  on  handle  of  razor, 
182-183;  oti  pottery,  136;  on  seals,  159. 

Dumps,  59;  height  of,  37. 

Ear  ornaments,  63,  197-198. 

Earrings,  of  copper  or  bronze,  199;  worn  by  figurines, 
155- 

Ears,  of  figurines,  155;  of  model  animals,  157,  158,  166. 

Earth  Goddess,  92,  152;  worship  of,  92. 

Eastern  Asiatic  or  Mongoloid  physical  type,  257-259. 

Egt’pt,  arrow-heads  of,  183;  beads  of,  205,  206,  213; 
bronzes  of,  174;  comparisons  with  patterns  of,  95, 
123;  with  pottery  of,  70,  73,  96,  iii;  with  mace- 
heads  of,  225;  with  pins  of,  195;  use  of  paddle  on 
pottery  of,  135;  worship  of  hare,  91. 

Ekka,  Indian  vehicle,  comparisons  with,  164,  165. 

Elam,  clay  figures  of,  152;  comparisons  with  pottery  of, 
90,  91,  96,  98,  too,  1 17,  1 19,  124,  125;  with 
seal-amulets  of,  142,  144. 

Elephant,  clay  figure  of,  44,  159;  on  seal,  43,  147;  tusk 
of,  14. 

Emery,  as  abrasive,  179,  21 1;  use  with  saw,  21 1. 

England  (Bronze  Age),  comparisons  with  beads  of, 
205;  with  razors  of,  182;  with  spear-heads  of,  180. 

Engraving,  of  seal-amulets,  145,  146,  147;  trial  piece, 
146. 

Euphorbia  plant,  69. 

Euphrates,  19. 

Europe,  183,  195,  197,  214. 

Evil  Eye,  charms  against,  69,  93,  201. 

Eyes,  of  figurines,  153,  154;  of  model  animals,  155-161, 
166;  paints  for,  77,  84,  134,  250-251. 

Excavation  methods,  vi-vii,  12,  17. 

Fabrics,  impress  on  metal,  185. 

Fabulous  animals,  model  in  clay,  158;  on  seals,  148. 

Faceting  of  pottery  surfaces,  132,  135. 

Factory’,  for  beads,  41-44,  45,  226,  243,  244. 

Faience,  amulets  in,  19,  26,  27,  48,  49,  140,  141,  143, 
144,  149,  207;  bangles  in,  ii,  45,  56,  58,  60,  191- 
192;  beads  in,  199,  202-208,  210,  213;  buttons  in, 
26,  63,  197;  cones  in,  30,  198;  gamesmen,  35,  43, 
55,  57,  169,  170;  making  of,  63;  marbles,  21,  168; 
materials  for,  10,  20,  48,  53,  234-235;  model  ani- 
mals and  birds  in,  35,  88,  91,  160;  ornaments  in, 
26,  63,  69,  96,  1 18,  197,  198;  tetrahedrons  in, 
169,  244,  246;  sealing  in,  95;  vessels  in,  48,  57, 
i39i  177:  vitreous  paste,  19 1,  206. 

Fan-shaped  headwear,  153. 

Fats  (scented),  84,  139. 

Feathers,  representation  on  model  birds,  155,  159,  160, 
i6i,  167. 

Feeding-cups,  in  pottery,  9,  54-56,  84,  217;  in  shell,  43, 
231-232. 

Ferries,  165. 

Field  cards,  vii. 

Field  peas,  250. 


INDEX 


328 

Figure-of-eight  motif,  on  beads,  199,  201;  on  pottery, 
126-127,  129. 

Figurines,  clays  used  for,  155;  consecration  of,  152; 
dating  of,  151;  eyes  of,  153,  154;  female,  6,  10, 
33.  36,  39,  43,  46,  51,  54,  I5I-I55:  find-spots  of, 
4,  6,  10,  II,  15,  21,  33,  36,  39,  40,  43,  45,  46, 
49-51,  54-56,  58;  fingers  of,  155;  goddess,  151,  152, 
155,  233;  hair  of,  98,  153;  from  Harappa  and 
Mohenjo-daro,  151-154,  155,  166;  hollow,  151, 
152;  kneeling,  152;  male,  10,  ii,  49,  50,  54,  55, 
56,  58,  151,  152,  154,  164,  165,  166;  modelling 
of,  152,  153;  ornaments  worn  hy,  1 52-1 54,  155, 
161,  167;  seated,  152;  slips  and  paints  used  on,  155; 
solid,  1 51,  152;  truncated,  151,  152;  types  of,  151; 
as  votive  offerings,  154;  work  of  children,  152,  153. 

Fillet,  of  copper,  194. 

Finger  rings,  34,  194. 

Fire-places,  14,  24,  25,  29,  32,  48. 

Firing,  of  camelian  heads,  200,  201,  204;  of  faience, 
220;  of  Harappa  wares,  66,  67,  70,  105;  of  Jhukar 
and  Jhangar  wares,  104,  133;  of  nodules  of  agate 
and  camelian,  52,  209,  214;  of  steatite,  210,  213. 

Fish,  on  amulets,  149;  represented  on  pottery,  77,  91, 
96,  102,  109,  122;  use  in  script,  91. 

Fisher-folk,  135. 

Fish-hooks,  10,  15,  45,  46,  55,  56,  57,  184. 

Flake  drills,  41,  43,  213. 

Flanges  on  model  birds,  160;  of  drain-pipes,  215;  of 
pottery  tube,  217. 

Fleeces,  on  model  animals,  159,  166. 

Flint,  cores  of,  43,  230;  flakes  of,  10,  11,  135,  230; 
drills  of,  15,  40,  41,  43,  48,  49,  50,  52,  57,  58, 
210,  211-213,  230;  polisher,  230;  saw,  56,  230. 

Floods,  V,  4,  12,  15,  17,  18,  19,  31,  37,  59,  63,  254. 

Floral  devices,  on  amulet,  142;  on  pottery,  77,  89,  121; 
in  metal,  199. 

Flour,  utensils  used  for,  86,  114. 

Flues,  of  furnace,  42,  43,  113,  217,  243. 

Fluting,  on  amulets,  143;  of  metal  vessels,  31,  139,  177. 

Foils,  gold  on  copper,  190,  199,  210. 

Food-stands,  3,  5,  7,  10,  13,  15,  17,  26,  29,  32,  35,  39, 
41,  65,  67,  70,  71,  74,  75,  80,  106-111,  116-117, 
119,  121,  122,  123,  126,  128,  130,  135,  177,  204; 
cord  impressions  on,  109;  countries  where  occur- 
ring, III;  covers  for,  75;  decoration  of,  74,  75, 
loi,  204;  of  grey  clay,  74,  75;  hand-made,  75; 
incised,  65,  70-71,  75,  no;  mode  of  manufacture, 
74;  shapes  of,  74-75- 

Footed  vessels,  g,  25,  no,  in,  112. 

Footings,  I,  13,  16,  38,  47,  61. 

Fossil,  cmstacean,  used  as  bead,  204,  231;  in  limestone, 
228;  -shells,  14,  63,  71,  204,  230-231;  -wood,  231. 

Foundations  of  walls,  1-7,  12,  13,  15-17,  28,  30,  31, 
32,  34,  37,  39-44,  46,  47-50,  51,  52,  60-63. 

France,  ancient  spear-heads  from,  180. 

Fresh-water  clams,  249;  mussels,  248. 

Fuchsite-quartzite,  head  made  from,  209. 

Fuel,  for  baking  of  pottery,  104,  133. 

Funerary  wares  from  Baluchistan,  96,  97,  124,  126, 
130,  134,  143. 

Furnaces,  42,  44,  52,  67,  104,  133,  243. 

Gamesmen,  51,  55,  60,  169-171;  hobbin-like  objects, 
170-171;  ivory,  171;  in  faience,  35,  43,  55,  57, 


169,  170;  materials  of,  169;  of  pottery,  8-10,  19, 
20,  22,  25,  26,  34,  35,  51,  54,  55,  64,  169,  170; 
sets  of,  169;  of  shell,  19,  169;  tetrahedrons,  169, 
244,  246;  types  of,  1 71;  from  Ur,  169. 

Garments,  152,  154,  164,  196. 

Gastropods,  list  of,  248. 

Gatti,  samples  of  bronze  from,  175. 

Geological  Survey  of  India,  209,  211. 

Geometric  designs  on  pottery,  89,  94-98,  99-101,  I02, 
104,  114. 

Germany,  ancient  pins  from,  195. 

Gharials,  on  amulet,  149;  on  shell  object,  233. 

Ghazi  Shah,  culture  levels,  128;  arrow-head  from,  184. 

Girdles  of  beads,  202,  213. 

Glazes  and  glazing,  amulets,  141,  143;  bangles,  191; 
beads,  53,  203,  204,  205,  207,  208;  buttons,  197; 
cones,  198;  in  Harappa  period,  53,  139;  in  Jhukar 
period,  25,  139;  marbles,  168;  materials  for,  10,  20, 
48,  53,  234-235;  reserved-,  72;  seals,  148;  terminal, 
202;  of  vessels,  48,  139. 

Globular  vessels,  83,  114. 

Goats,  teeth  of,  248;  home  of  wild,  90;  pictured  on 
pottery,  89,  90,  1 1 7. 

Goddess  figurines,  151,  152,  155,  161,  233. 

Gold,  foil,  190,  199,  210;  head-cones,  198;  jewellery, 
190;  knife  from  Ur,  181;  weights  used  for  weigh- 
ing, 244. 

Goose,  pictured  on  pottery,  136;  on  handle  of  razor,  182. 

Grain,  mealing  of,  13,  51,  72;  in  jars,  51;  samples  of, 
250;  soaking  of,  227;  stones  for  grinding,  4,  10, 
II,  152,  227-228;  stores  of,  31,  51. 

Granite,  weights  of,  242. 

Gratings,  60,  73,  218. 

Graves,  of  late  date,  v-vi,  23,  132,  137,  138. 

Gravers,  184. 

Great  Cutting,  see  Cutting. 

Greece,  comparisons  with  painted  pottery  of,  69,  96, 
126. 

Grey  slips,  66,  74,  76,  80,  106. 

Grey  ware,  bead,  23,  204,  208;  cone,  26;  pottery,  23, 
66,  71,  74,  75,  76,  77,  80,  81,  82,  86,  104,  132- 
135,  140;  gamesman,  169,  170;  head-rest,  220. 

Groups,  of  copper  and  bronze,  35,  40,  41,  43,  51,  52, 
55,  56,  85,  86,  175-176,  178,  194,  195,  209,  253; 
of  pottery,  3,  7,  53,  54,  56,  57,  86,  133,  135,  137. 

Groups-of-lines  pattern,  114,  115,  119,  125,  134. 

Guide  markings  on  pottery,  73,  94,  108. 

Guilloche  motifs,  on  beads,  201;  on  pottery,  93. 

Gutters,  8,  50,  58,  216,  217. 

Gypsum,  use  as  mortar,  216. 

Haematite,  beads  of,  209;  grains  of,  251;  seal  of,  144; 
manganiferous,  as  paint  on  pottery,  88,  89,  107. 

Hair,  vi;  of  deities,  98;  of  figurines,  153;  of  model 
animals,  155,  157,  158;  pins  for,  196. 

Hammam,  42. 

Hammurabi,  dating  of  period  of,  188. 

Hanai  Tepe,  256,  262. 

Handles,  108;  of  amulets  and  seals,  32,  48,  140-141, 
144,  145,  146;  of  brushes  (?),  223;  of  chisels,  184- 
185;  of  cups,  8,  9,  10,  22,  54,  82;  of  hones,  227; 
of  jar-covers,  81,  108,  113,  142,  177;  of  knives,  22, 
181,  222;  for  mace-heads,  224;  of  metal  utensils. 


INDEX 


3^9 


113,  176,  177;  of  pottery  vessels,  8,  22,  108,  109, 
1 13;  of  razors,  182-183;  of  shovel,  187. 

Hand-made  pottery,  67,  69,  77,  78,  79,  80,  81,  102, 
104,  105,  109,  112,  113,  115,  116,  132,  133. 

Harappa,  absence  of  curved  bricks  at,  4;  amulets,  126, 
143;  beads,  200,  213;  comparison  of  objects  with, 
9;  curved  knives,  181;  figurines,  151,  152,  153; 
gamesmen,  169;  model  animals,  156,  161;  model 
carts  and  chariots,  160,  163,  165;  ornaments,  190, 
198;  pavements  at,  13,  51;  pottery  designs,  91; 
ratdes,  167;  seals,  141-142,  143;  seeds  from,  250; 
tablets,  t46 

Harappa,  period  I,  12,  24,  25,  27-36,  37-38,  174;  II,  12, 
18,  28,  34,  35-36,  37-58,  71,  174,  179;  III,  12,  13, 
16,  37,  71;  IV,  16,  17,  18;  V,  18. 

Harappa  Culture,  beads,  199-208,  210,  213;  bone  awls, 
234;  cities  of,  45,  83,  198;  faience  vessels  of,  139; 
figurines  of,  1 51-155;  maceheads  of,  224;  metal 
objects  of,  174-188,  194-195;  migration  of,  63; 
model  animals  of,  155-161;  pottery  of,  animal  de- 
signs, 70,  88-92;  geometric  designs  of,  70,  89,  94- 
loi;  types  of,  74-88;  comparisons  with  other  wares, 
104,  105,  108,  109,  III,  112,  113,  117,  118,  120, 
122,  123,  124,  125,  126,  127-129,  138,  217,  253; 
remains  in  Mound  I,  59-64,  86;  script  of,  127,  142, 
147;  seals  of,  70,  140,  141,  142,  143,  144,  145- 
149;  seed  samples  of,  250;  source  of,  175;  standard 
of  weight,  236,  237,  240;  stone  vessels  of,  138; 
toys,  162-193;  trading  relations,  129;  use  of  term, 
viii,  ix,  9,  252;  weights  of,  34,  52,  53,  56,  57,  64, 
225-227,  236-246. 

Hare,  represented  on  pottery,  91;  worship  in  Egypt,  91. 

Hatched  triangular  motifs,  114,  134. 

Harvard  University,  242,  246,  249. 

Head-dresses,  147,  153,  155,  162. 

Head-omaments,  198,  208,  232. 

Head-rests,  19,  25,  155,  220. 

Heating  system,  42,  44. 

Hemispherical  motifs,  on  pottery,  68,  97-98. 

Hens,  whistles  in  form  of,  45,  167. 

Herbs,  stones  for  grinding,  227. 

Hide  motifs,  on  pottery,  98,  125. 

Highland  Culture  of  Persia,  123-124. 

Hissar  cultures,  dating  of,  188;  objects  of,  188,  194, 
195,  200,  205. 

Hittite  pottery  and  seals,  96,  144;  script,  91,  127;  shield, 
126. 

Hoards  of  copper  and  bronze,  35,  40,  41,  43,  51,  52, 

55,  56,  85,  175-176,  178,  194.  195,  209,  253- 

Hog  deer,  bones  of,  246,  248. 

Hones,  10,  14,  32,  34,  35,  40,  55,  58,  227,  228;  in 
animal  form,  44,  50,  214;  use  in  bead-making,  45, 

56,  211,  213,  214,  227,  229. 

Hornblende,  beads  and  pendants  of,  202,  204,  209; 
grains  of,  251. 

Homs,  of  animals  on  pottery,  10,  156;  on  seals,  148, 
159;  of  model  animals,  10,  155-158,  166,  234;  of 
hog  deer,  246,  248;  of  sambar  deer,  49,  53,  246, 
248. 

Homed  animals,  in  association  with  sun-symbols,  95. 

Houses,  of  Harappa  I,  24,  27,  28,  32,  33;  of  Harappa 
II,  38,  40,  45,  46,  47,  48,  50;  in  Mound  I,  59,  61, 
62,  63. 


Human  bones,  2,  4,  23,  252. 

Human  figures,  in  clay,  151-155;  on  amulets  and  seals, 
142,  147-148,  149-150. 

Humped  oxen,  models  of,  155,  156,  165. 

Huts,  24,  133. 

Hypocaust,  42,  44. 

Ibex,  pictured  on  amulet,  142;  on  pottery,  89,  90,  98, 
117- 

Identification  marks,  on  pottery,  108,  125. 

Idol  makers,  152. 

Imperial  Institute  of  Agricultural  Research,  Delhi,  250. 

Implements,  176,  178-189;  of  bone,  25-27,  54,  86,  234; 
for  bead  making,  186-187,  214>  ^43;  fot  leather 
working,  219,  228. 

Incense,  camphor  as,  83;  stands  for,  147;  vessels  for,  83. 

Incised  work,  on  balls,  168;  bangles,  191,  192;  beads, 
206-208;  buttons,  197;  cones,  172,  198;  ivory,  233; 
lines  to  guide  pottery  painter,  94;  on  marbles,  168; 
pins,  195,  196;  pottery,  Harappa  W'are,  10,  21,  22, 
53.  54.  57.  65,  70-72,  75.  76,  78,  82,  98;  Jhangar 
ware,  23,  132,  134;  Jhukar  ware,  19,  25,  26,  27, 
108-110,  113,  125,  128;  on  shell,  198,  231;  on 
tables,  219. 

Incurved-rhomb  patterns,  127. 

India,  ancient  merchants,  71,  145;  Archaeological  Sur- 
vey of,  V,  vii;  beads,  200,  203,  210,  214;  chapatis, 
220;  customs  in,  iii,  16 1;  evil  eye,  201;  fishing 
cat,  222;  games,  169;  Geological  Survey,  209,  21 1; 
goat  in,  90;  Khonds  of,  92;  lingara  worship,  171; 
metal  objects,  183,  189,  195;  model  carts  and 
chariots,  160,  164;  northwest  area,  ix;  peacock  in, 
92;  physical  types  in,  153,  256-257;  pottery  motifs, 
94-95,  100;  pre-Harappa  people,  102;  temples,  99, 
193;  tin,  174. 

Indian  Research  Institute,  Bombay,  vii. 

Indians,  as  bead-makers  in  Sumer,  212. 

Indo-Sassanian  pottery,  103. 

Indus  river,  v,  18,  19,  63,  90,  165,  233,  248-250,  254; 
valley,  129,  144. 

Indus  Valley  Culture,  viii,  ix,  9;  art  of,  69;  dearth  of 
war-weapons,  164;  racial  types,  153;  unit  of  weight 
of,  240,  241. 

Ingots,  43,  175,  187-188. 

Ink,  220;  ink-jar  (?),  49,  220. 

Inlays,  pigment,  169,  198,  205;  shell-,  63,  230,  232, 
234;  use  for  beads,  205;  use  for  gamesmen,  169, 
170. 

Inscriptions,  on  implements,  178;  on  pottery,  7,  20,  21, 
48,  68-70,  91,  99,  126;  on  seal-amulets,  143,  145, 
146,  148-149;  trial,  4,  146. 

Insects,  cages  for,  9,  56,  77;  pictured  on  pottery,  92, 
102,  123. 

Intersecting  circle  patterns,  in  Assyria,  95;  on  pottery, 
71,  72,  81,  89,  94-95,  100,  102;  on  seal-amulets, 
142. 

Iran,  see  Persia. 

Iraq,  painted  pottery  of,  94,  96,  97,  100,  119,  122,  125, 
127;  use  of  rosette  on  pottery  of,  100. 

Iron,  arrowhead,  9,  189;  as  pigment,  200,  214. 

Irregular  lines  and  markings,  on  pottery,  125. 

Islamic,  see  Muhammadan. 

Italy,  comparisons  with  ancient  pottery  of,  81;  cranial 
types  of,  259. 


33° 


INDEX 


Ivory,  bar  of,  233;  comb  of,  56,  196;  die  of,  10,  58,  171; 
incised  work  on,  233;  objects  of,  53,  56;  peg,  57, 
233;  pin  of,  194;  tusk,  14;  working  of,  14,  53. 

Jackstones,  seeds  used  as,  169. 

Jade,  absence  of  beads  of,  209. 

Jai-damb,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  ri9,  130. 

Jamal-Kirio,  village  of,  v,  17. 

Jambs,  of  doorways,  4,  14,  t6,  32,  42,  43,  47,  48,  52, 
59,  60. 

Jam-Dahri,  village  of,  vi. 

Jar-covers,  of  copper,  45,  177-178;  decorated,  81,  112- 
ri3,  128,  r4a;  hand-made,  81;  of  pottery,  10,  13, 
21,  26,  33,  35,  54,  56,  58,  79,  80,  81,  94,  108, 
1 12,  1 13,  128,  142;  types  of,  80-81. 

Jar-painters,  94,  102,  107,  118,  122,  127. 

Jars,  in  bronze,  3,  3r,  139,  177;  copper,  29,  79;  in 
faience,  48,  57;  Harappa,  31,  39,  41,  46,  48,  53, 
54,  55,  57,  58,  63;  Jhukar,  25,  26,  30,  32,  48, 

86,  87,  88,  106,  ro7,  112;  perforated,  55;  use  as 
stoppers,  81;  as  vault  lining,  23. 

Jar-stands,  ii,  21,  26,  28,  50,  54,  55,  60,  70,  73,  82, 
98,  to8,  tr3. 

Jar-stoppers,  of  pottery,  t4,  2t,  28,  32,  35,  56,  79,  81, 
222;  of  shell,  44-45,  231. 

Jasper,  beads  of,  203,  204,  209;  weights  of,  242,  244. 

Jatakas,  240. 

Jelly-fish  pattern  on  pottery,  122. 

Jemdet  Nasr,  comparisons  with  signs  on  tablets  from, 
69;  with  motifs  on  pottery  of,  117,  119,  120. 

Jerash,  drain-pipes  from,  216. 

Jewellery,  190,  199-214,  243;  worn  by  figurines,  152- 
155,  167. 

Jewurgi,  257. 

Jhajha,  209. 

Jhangar  Period,  23-24,  252;  arrow-head  (?)  of,  189; 
bead  of,  208;  chronology  of,  ix;  levels  of  pottery  of, 
23,  24,  132;  pottery  of,  23,  112,  i32-r38,  140, 
143;  village  of,  132. 

Jhukar,  village  of,  24,  103,  no,  112. 

Jhukar  Period,  amulets  of,  24,  25,  33,  48,  140-145, 
189,  208;  arrow-head  of  (?),  184;  awls  of,  234; 
beads  of,  25,  207,  208;  brick-robbing  in,  r89; 
buttons  of,  197,  198;  chronology  of,  ix,  25,  103, 
188;  glazed  wares  of,  139;  head-rest  of,  ig,  25, 
155,  220;  mace-head  of  (?),  224;  masonry  of,  24, 
25,  29,  30,  31,  32-34;  metal  objects,  30,  184,  188- 
189,  195-196;  model  animals  of,  14,  155,  157; 
pins  of,  195;  objects  of,  19-20,  24,  27,  29,  30,  32, 

87,  103,  108,  no,  112,  139,  149,  223;  sphere  of 
influence  of,  I3t. 

Jhukar  pottery,  29,  30,  32,  34,  49,  95,  too,  tor,  102, 
i03-r3i,  189;  clays  used  for,  104;  colours  used  on, 
t03,  105-107,  118-120,  128-129,  130;  comparisons 
with  other  wares,  86-88,  95,  tor,  1 02-1 04,  113, 
ir4,  119,  t28-i3i,  136;  decoration  of,  to4,  108, 
ro9,  in,  112,  114-127,  135,  195;  levels  of,  ix; 
storage  jars,  29,  109,  114,  116,  117,  118,  121, 
122,  125,  126;  straw  impressions  on,  133;  types  of, 
110-116,  1 18;  use  of  paddle  on,  105. 

Karachi,  city  of,  v,  viii;  spring  tide  at,  vi. 

Kashan,  pins  from,  195. 

Kassite,  seals,  124. 


Khair  tree,  as  motif  on  pottery,  93. 

Khalil  Pir  (local  saint),  v. 

Khirthar  Mountains,  v. 

Khonds,  92. 

Khurab,  pottery  from,  92,  120. 

Kilns,  I,  14,  70,  163. 

Kish,  comparisons  with  dove  figures  from,  161;  crania 
from,  256,  262;  with  fillets  from,  194;  with  pottery 
from,  72,  73;  motifs  on  beads  from,  201;  motifs  on 
seals,  96. 

Knives,  of  copper  or  bronze,  10,  n,  29,  39,  41,  43, 
53-57,  176,  180-182,  222;  for  dressing  leather,  181; 
midribs  of,  181;  rivet  holes  in,  181,  182;  of  stone, 
10,  n,  135,  230;  tangs  of,  180,  181. 

Knob-handles,  of  jar-covers,  81,  108,  128. 

Knossos,  drain-pipes  from,  216. 

Knuckle-bones,  26,  36,  170. 

Kohl,  177. 

Kohl- jars  or  eye  paint  containers,  glazed,  57,  139;  in 
bronze,  3,  31,  139,  177;  of  pottery,  4,  6,  7,  9,  ii, 
16,  20,  35,  41,  55,  56,  58,  64,  66,  68,  91,  132- 
134- 

Kohtras  Buthi,  98. 

Kulli,  85. 

Ladder  patterns,  on  pottery,  75,  78,  80,  97. 

Ladles,  in  pottery,  82;  in  shell,  28,  57,  62,  231,  232. 

Lake  Manchhar,  118,  135. 

Lamps,  in  pottery,  26,  114;  in  shell,  232. 

Lance-heads,  35,  180. 

Lapidaries,  48,  214,  243. 

Lapis-lazuli,  at  Ur,  169,  213;  beads  of,  203,  207,  209, 
213,  243;  sources  of,  209. 

Larkana,  103. 

Lashings,  for  knives,  181;  for  mace-heads,  224;  for 
spearheads,  180;  for  stone  dish,  231. 

Late  burials,  v-vi,  2,  4,  23,  132,  137,  138. 

Late  pottery,  23,  117,  132-138. 

Lattice  pattern,  on  pottery,  138. 

Lead,  as  cosmetic,  251;  fragments  of,  188;  trial  use  on 
beads,  200. 

Leaf  and  bud  forms,  on  pottery,  75,  81,  92,  93,  95,  118, 
126,  142,  150. 

Leather,  copies  of  amulet-cases,  35,  45,  53,  54,  196-197; 
dressing  of,  219;  knives  for,  181;  stones  for  work- 
ing of,  228;  workers  in,  228. 

Legs,  of  model  animals,  155,  157-160;  of  tables,  219. 

Lentoid-shaped  amulets,  143;  maces,  224. 

Levels,  datum-,  vi,  i,  19,  135;  Jhangar  pottery,  23,  24, 
132;  of  Jhukar  pottery,  ix;  preparations  for  taking, 
vi;  of  seal-amulets,  149;  spring  tide  at  Karachi,  vi; 
of  sub-soil  water,  9,  12,  17,  19,  65. 

Libation  vessels,  87. 

Libyan  shield,  126. 

Lime,  as  degraissant,  66,  104,  133,  134,  135,  138,  155, 
216;  use  for  colouring  agates,  214. 

Limestone,  beads  of,  204,  209;  cherty-,  228;  drill-head, 
9,  225;  fossiliferous,  228;  mace-heads  of,  8,  9,  il, 
224;  marbles  of,  168;  method  of  cutting,  179,  186; 
outcrops  of,  230;  plumb-bob,  229;  tetraheions  in, 
244;  use  of  saw  on,  179;  weights  of,  242,  244. 

Lingams  and  lingam  worship,  171,  172. 

Lining  of  wells,  1 7. 

Linked-ball  motif,  99. 


INDEX 


331 


Lips  of  figurines,  154. 

Lists,  of  gastropods,  248;  mollusca,  248-250;  pelecypods, 
248;  or  skull  measurements,  261-264;  of  weignts, 
238-239,  244,  245,  247. 

Lohumjo-daro,  beads  from,  207;  bracelets  from,  191; 

pottery  from,  no,  124. 

Loom,  portion  of,  234. 

Loop  patterns,  on  pottery,  74,  75.  ^7>  94.  97.  9°.  99. 
loi,  ni,  112,  115,  117.  121-122,  128,  130,  136, 

'37- 

Lotus  (?)  pattern,  on  pottery,  118,  120,  121. 

Lugs,  on  drain-pipes,  216;  on  pottery,  19,  20,  109;  on 
seal-amulets,  140-14 1. 

Lunar  emblems  on  pottery,  71,  78,  122,  123. 

Lycian  coins,  95. 


Mace-heads,  49,  225;  boring  of,  225;  holes  in,  224; 
lashings  for,  224;  of  pottery,  224;  of  stone,  8,  9,  n, 
20,  35,  43.  49.  55.  57.  63-64;  types  of,  224; 
unfinished,  n,  63,  225.  _ 

Madras,  ritual  vessels,  83;  shell  fee^ng-cups  used  in, 
232;  source  of  amazonite,  209;  use  of  solar  symbols 
in,  95. 

Magnetite,  in  chert  drills,  211. 

Main  sewers,  45-46.  49.  5°- 

Main  streets,  38,  39,  40,  45,  46,  49.  5°- 

Malay  States,  use  of  paddle  on  pottery,  135;  source  ot 


88, 

168; 

II. 


tin,  174- 

Male  organs,  on  figurines,  166. 

Maltese  cross,  motif  on  pottery,  123-124. 

Malu  Sand,  village  of,  23. 

Manchhar  Lake,  ii8,  135. 

Mandrel,  186,  19 1. 

Manganese,  use  on  beads,  200-201,  204,  207- 
Manganiferous  haematite,  use  as  paint  on  pottery, 

89,  107. 

Mangers,  61,  147. 

Marbles,  168;  decoration  of,  168;  of  faience,  21,  _ 
incised,  168;  materials  of,  168;  of  pottery,  g, 

168,  173;  of  shell,  28,  43,  53,  168. 

Mariyamma  (goddess),  69. 

Marlchor,  pictured  on  pottery,  90. 

Markings  on  model  animals,  155.  157.  i5°.  I59.  160. 
161,  166,  167. 

Masab,  99.  , . , 

Masonry,  alternating  courses  of  burnt  and  unbumt 
bricks,  7;  arrangement  of  bricks,  39,  46,  47.  5°. 
60,  61;  batter  of,  2,  5,  31:  broken,  2,  15;  corWled, 

23,  62;  damage  caused  by  weathering  and  floods, 

1,  2,  3,  5-7,  12.  14.  17.  18.  27-30.  39.  40;  fiie- 
places,  14,  24,  25,  29,  32,  48;  footings  of,  i,  13. 
16,  38,  47,  61;  Harappa  I,  24,  ^.7.  28,  29;  U,  38. 
40,  51;  III,  15,  16;  IV,  16,  17;  of  Jhukai  work, 

24,  25,  29,  30,  32-34;  mortar,  1,  216;  in  Mound  1, 
60,  61;  of  mud-brick,  44,  497  52.;  poorly  built,  3, 
24,  29,  30,  32,  61,  190;  stone,  4;  subsidences  of, 

2,  12,  29,  31,  32,  34.  4^.  46,  243. 

Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  240. 

Matting,  for  huts,  24,  25,  133;  foi  loofs  of  vehicles, 

162,  164. 

Medallions,  on  head-dresses,  153. 

Medicines,  53,  93- 
Mehi-damb,  71,  91- 
Merchants,  71,  i45- 


Merkes  (Babylon),  206.  r 1 e 

Mesopotamia,  arrow-heads  of,  183;  art  of,  69;  beads  ot, 
200,  201,  205,  213;  comparisons  with  pottery  from, 

72,  73,  94.  96,  98.  99,  10°.  Ill,  1 17.  1 1 9.  120- 
125,  127;  floods  in,  19;  influx  of  peoples,  145. 
mosaics  of,  164,  171;  pins  from,  1951  rings,  194- 

Metal,  amulets,  140;  castings  of,  40,  41,  52,  56,  I74. 
175,  177.  i8o,  185,  187,  188;  groups  of,  35,  40, 

41,  43.  51,  52,  55,  56,  85,  86,  175-176,  178,  194, 
195,  209,  253;  sheet-,  179,  181,  183.  190-191! 
vessels  of,  29,  31,  48,  79,  139.  176-178,  212, 
working  quarter  in,  175;  workers  in,  52. 

Mica,  as  degraissant,  66,  104,  116,  133.  I34.  I35.  *44. 
155,  217;  deposit  of,  163,  165. 

Micro-photographs,  of  beads,  2 10-2 13. 

Mid-ribs,  of  arrows,  183;  of  daggers,  180;  of  knives, 
181;  of  spear-heads,  180. 

Migrations,  145. 

Milk-tight  vessels,  84,  86. 

Milling,  of  seals,  142,  143. 

Mimosa  tree,  on  pottery,  93. 

Miniature  pottery,  43,  79.  81,  83,  84,  114,  177- 

Minoan,  Mother-Goddess,  161;  script,  96;  shields,  126. 

Minute  beads,  42,  186,  203,  210,  212,  213,  244;  manu- 
facture of,  1 86. 

Miscellaneous  objects,  descriptions  of,  215-235. 

Missiles,  pottery  balls  as,  168. 

Mode  of  weights,  236,  237,  240. 

Model  animals,  4,  7,  8,  9,  10,  ii,  14.  15.  i9.  21,  33. 
39,  40,  41,  44.  45.  49.  50.  53'58.  155-161.  165. 
166;  hollow  examples,  158,  165;  legs  of,  155,  157- 
i6o;  levels  found  at,  155;  one-horned,  157;  paints 
and  slips  used  on,  155,  156.  i57.  158-160,  161, 
166,  167;  tails  of,  158,  159.  166;  set  on  wheels, 
50,  54,  55,  159.  163.  165-166;  work  of  children,  158. 

Model  birds,  35,  36,  77,  160;  dove,  2,  8,  9,  ii,  39.  I5i> 
160-161;  duck,  40.  136,  159:  pigeon,  160. 

Models,  of  cages,  77;  of  cakes,  11,  57.  58.  69,  135,  209, 
223;  of  pottery,  43,  79.  81,  83,  84,  114,  i77!  of 
tools,  56,  179,  221-222;  of  vehicles,  3,  9,  15.  ^i. 
35.  39.  41.  52.  56.  135.  152,  162-165. 

Modha,  98. 

Moghul-ghunc^ai,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  100,  130, 

1 3 1 . 

Mohenjo-daro,  absence  of  curved  brick  at,  4;  amulets, 
91,99,  i49;batterof  walls,  31; beads,  199,  200,202, 
205,  206,  207,  208,  209,  210;  bricks,  37;  bronze 
and  copper  objects,  174-184,  186,  188;  cages,  77; 
chert  cores,  230;  comb,  196;  cones,  171-173!  cop|^ 
tablets,  91;  cosmetic  spoon,  232;  cotton,  185;  crania, 
256;  dancing  girl,  150;  dice,  171;  drainpipes,  215, 
216;  faience  objects,  88,  96;  figurines,  151-155, 
166;  flood  strata,  18,  19;  gamesmen,  169;  gutters, 
217;  Harappa  culture  at,  ix;  hoards,  52!  hones, 
214;  hypocaust,  44;  ivory,  233;  jewellery,,  190-192, 
194,  195,  197,  198,  202,  203;  kilns,  70;  lamps, 
1 14;  maceheads,  225;  marbles,  168;  masonry,  i,  2, 
13;  model  animals,  96,  155,  156,  158,  159,  161; 
model  chariots,  160,  163;  mud-brick  platforms,  15, 
37;  pavements,  13,  51!  pottery,  68,  75,  78-82,  84- 
87,  89-94;  coarse  ware,  73;  cut  ware,  73;  glazed 
ware,  72;  grey  ware,  66;  incised  ware,  65,  71 ! j®i- 
stoppers,  231;  motives  on,  89-91,  93,  94.  97-i°i> 
119,  122,  123;  reserved-slip  ware,  72;  spouted 


332 


INDEX 


ware,  112;  ratdes,  167;  seals,  70,  95,  99,  141-143, 
146,  147,  157,  159;  system  of  numbering  at,  vi; 
system  of  recording  at,  vii,  73;  sub-soil  water,  12; 
weights  from,  236,  237,  240-244;  wheat  from,  250. 

Mollusca,  list  of,  249-250. 

Monghyr,  district  of,  209. 

Mongoose,  hones  in  form  of,  44,  50,  214. 

Monkey-like  figures,  in  pottery,  166;  on  seals,  148. 

Montgomery,  district  of,  viii. 

Moon,  markings  on,  91;  patterns  derived  from,  71,  78, 
122,  123. 

Mops,  use  in  painting,  107. 

Mortar,  i,  216. 

Mosaics,  in  Sumer,  164,  r7i. 

Mother-Goddess,  dove  sacred  to,  161;  figures  of,  69, 
151,  152,  161. 

Mother-of-pearl,  beads  of,  205,  209. 

Motifs,  on  beads,  201;  chevron,  201;  divided  circle,  202; 
figure-of-eight,  201;  guilloche,  201;  trefoil,  205. 

Motifs,  on  pottery;  animals,  88-90,  91,  93,  96,  98,  102, 
1 17,  123,  125,  126,  130;  ball  and  stem,  loi,  it9, 
130;  basketry,  patterns  derived  from,  97,  loi,  119, 
r47,  148;  bead,  tor,  124;  birds,  88,  89,  91,  92, 
93,  98,  102,  136;  border  patterns,  80,  82,  89,  95, 

96,  101,  1 18,  120,  125,  126,  127,  129;  compari- 
sons between  motifs  on  Indian  and  foreign  wares— 
(Anatolian,  96;  early  Assyrian,  96,  97,  100,  in, 
117,  1 19,  120,  122,  129;  early  Baluchistan,  117- 

121,  122,  124,  126,  130,  132,  134,  137,  143: 
Bosnia,  in;  early  Cilician,  124;  early  Cretan, 
in,  123,  126,  202;  Egypt,  70,  73,  96,  in; 
Elam,  90,  91,  96,  98,  100,  117,  119,  124, 
125;  early  Palestinian,  69,  73,  124;  early  Persian, 
69;  93>  97>  99-100,  112,  117,  n8,  121,  124, 
127,  129;  early  Sistan,  120,  123,  124,  126, 
127;  early  Syrian,  94,  124);  chequer  patterns, 

97,  107,  in,  129;  chevrons,  119,  133,  134,  139; 

comb  pattern,  98;  concentric  circles,  80,  81,  in, 
168,  1 71,  201;  cone-shaped  motifs,  91,99;  crescent- 
shaped motifs,  71,  78,  122,  123;  criss-cross  bands, 
82,  89,  90,  100,  loi,  119,  120,  121,  125,  127, 
129,  134,  138;  cruciform  devices,  99-100,  108, 
123-124;  divided  circle,  198;  festoons,  94;  figure- 
of-eight  pattern,  126-127,  129;  fishes,  77,  91,  96, 
102,  109,  122;  floral  patterns,  77,  89,  121;  goat, 
89,  90,  117;  guide  markings,  73,  94,  108;  guilloche, 
93;  hatched  borders,  82;  hatched  trian^es,  114, 
134;  hemispherical  motifs,  97-98;  hide  motifs,  98, 
125;  ibex,  89,  90,  98,  117;  incuived-rhomb 

pattern,  127;  insect  forms,  92,  102,  123;  inter- 
secting-circles,  71,  72,  81,  8g,  94-95,  100,  102; 
irregular  lines  and  markings,  125;  jelly-fish  pattern, 
122;  ladder  motif,  75,  78,  80,  97;  leaf  and  bud 
forms,  75,  81,  92,  93,  95,  118,  126;  lines  in 
groups,  114,  115,  119,  125,  134;  linked  ball  motif, 
99;  loops,  74,  75,  87,  94,  97,  98,  99,  loi,  in, 
112,  115,  117,  121-122,  128,  130,  136,  137;  lotus 
(?)  pattern,  118,  120,  121;  lunar  motifs,  71,  78, 

122,  123;  markhor  goat,  90;  notched  stripes,  75, 

125;  palmetto,  136;  peacock  figures,  88,  89,  91- 
92,  102;  pedestal  motifs,  98-99;  pentacle,  69;  pipal- 
leaf  motif,  5,  66,  93,  95,  118;  plant  forms,  5,  66, 
75>  891  9i-95>  i°2,  108,  117-119,  120,  122, 

126,  130,  136,  137;  rare  patterns,  66,  126-127; 


red  bands,  106,  107,  no,  114,  116,  117,  121,  128, 
129,  136,  138;  resemblances  between  patterns  on 
Amri  and  Harappa  wares,  10 1,  102,  117,  124,  129; 
between  Amri  and  Jhukar  wares,  117,  128,  129; 
between  Baluchi  and  Jhukar  wares,  109,  119,  126, 
129-131;  between  Baluchi  and  Tell  Halaf  wares, 
129,  130;  between  Harappa  and  Jhukar  wares, 
103-104,  117,  n8,  127-129;  between  Jhukar  and 
Tell  Halaf  wares,  96,  129;  rhomb  motifs,  loo-ioi, 
120,  124,  127-129;  rosettes,  94,  100,  108,  125, 
128;  roundels,  72,  88,  96,  137;  running  animal, 
130;  sacred  patterns,  69,  71;  scale  patterns,  97, 
121;  scrabble  markings,  99;  serpent  devices,  91, 

99,  126;  shell  forms,  71,  204;  solar  motifs,  68,  75,. 
80,  92,  95-97,  100,  loi,  109,  123;  spiralliform 
motifs,  70-71,  75,  76,  88,  109,  112;  spots,  95,  108, 
112,  115,  121,  125,  136,  137,  138;  squirrel,  88, 
90,  102;  star  motifs,  69,  108;  tree  motifs,  88,  89, 
93,  108,  118,  119;  triangles,  69,  70,  100,  114, 
122,  123,  133,  134;  water-plants,  91,  92,  93,  118; 
2ig-zag  motifs,  109,  129,  133,  134,  136,  137. 

Moulds,  for  amulets,  149;  for  buttons,  197;  for  beads, 
204,  207,  210;  for  faience  objects,  32,  191,  219- 
220. 

Mounds,  of  Chanhu-daro,  v,  vi,  59;  clearance  of,  i,  190; 
sequence  of  cultures  in,  18,  103,  155;  description 
of  levels  of,  23-36,  37-58,  59-64;  dimensions  of, 
V,  I,  59;  squaring  of,  vi;  weathering  of,  v,  59,  103; 
of  Jhukar,  103;  of  Trihni,  135. 

Mouths,  of  figurines,  153,  154;  of  model  animals,  156. 

Mud-bricks,  38,  44,  48;  platforms  of,  4,  15,  17,  18,  24, 
37,  40,  41,  44,  48;  sizes  of,  15;  walls  of,  49,  52. 

Muffle,  for  faience  objects,  219-220. 

Muhammadan,  graves,  23,  132,  137-138,  189;  pottery, 

1 1 7,  137-138;  reverence  for  dove,  161. 

Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  viii,  174,  186-187,  229, 
239-241,  242,  243,  244,  247,  252. 

Mussels  (fresh-water),  248. 

Musyan,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  124. 

Mysore,  source  of  fuchsite,  209. 

Naga  crania,  257. 

Nal,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  85,  90,  91,  122. 

Nawabshah  district,  v. 

Necklaces,  of  beads,  202,  203;  worn  by  figurines,  152, 
167. 

Negroid  type,  257,  258,  259. 

Neolithic  Spain,  cranial  types  of,  259. 

Netting,  on  animals,  159;  on  sides  of  cart,  163. 

Net-weights,  54-56,  168,  221. 

New  Delhi,  Central  Asian  Museum,  240. 

New  signs  on  seals,  149. 

Niches,  14,  25,  29,  44. 

Nim  trees,  pictured  on  pottery,  93. 

Nimrod,  palace  at,  95. 

Nineveh,  beads  of,  200;  pottery  of,  120. 

Nodules,  of  agate,  50,  52,  179,  209,  214;  of  camelian, 
43,  52,  179,  209,  212,  214,  243;  of  flint,  168;  use 
of  saw  on,  2 1 1 . 

North  Syrian  pottery,  comparisons  with,  94-95,  96,  98, 

100,  117,  119,  120,  121,  122,  123,  124,  125,  126, 
127,  129,  130,  145. 

Nose  ornaments,  63,  197-198. 


INDEX 


333 


Noses,  of  figurines,  154. 

Nostrils,  of  animal  figures,  156-158. 

Notched  stripes  motif,  on  pottery,  75,  125;  on  bangles, 
192. 

Nubia,  pottery  of,  69. 

Nude  figurines,  154. 

Numbers,  dominance  of  16  in  India,  240;  of  rooms  and 
loci,  vi-vii. 

Numerical  characters,  incised  on  axes,  178. 

Objects,  in  bone  and  ivory,  14,  25-27,  36,  53,  54,  56- 
58,  86,  133,  171,  194,  196,  233-234;  of  scientific 
interest,  236-251;  in  shell,  22,  43,  53,  231-233; 
of  unknown  use,  222,  223. 

Occupation  of  Chanhu-daro  by  Jhukar  people,  32,  103. 

Occupation  strata,  9,  12,  16-18,  24,  27,  34,  37,  38, 
103,  132. 

Ochre  (red),  on  animal  figures,  156-159;  in  slips  and 
paints,  66-67,  io3"i°4,  105-106,  107;  stick  of, 
28,  235;  on  unfinished  seals,  146. 

Offerings,  154,  161,  173. 

Oil,  containers  for,  76. 

Ointments.  139. 

Onyx,  beads  of,  204,  209. 

Ores,  copper,  174,  175;  smelting  of,  in  Palestine,  175; 
tin,  175. 

Ornaments,  96;  attached  to  horns  of  catde,  156;  for 
head,  198,  208,  232;  button  ornaments,  26,  63, 
197;  in  copper  or  bronze,  55,  190,  198,  199;  in 
flower  form,  199;  for  nose  or  ear,  63,  197-198; 
personal,  190-233;  in  form  of  sun-symbols,  96; 
from  Ur,  199;  as  wealth,  190. 

Oval  dishes,  in  pottery,  54,  87. 

Oxen,  bones  of,  234,  246;  as  draught  animal,  165;  on 
Jhukar  amulet,  142;  models,  165,  166. 

Pack-animals,  43. 

Paddle,  of  bone,  54;  use  on  foreign  pottery,  135;  use 
on  wares  from  Chanhu-daro,  86,  105,  132,  135, 
136,  138. 

Paints,  for  eyes,  77,  84,  134,  250-25 1;  use  on  bangles, 
193;  use  on  beads,  200-201,  204,  207;  on  cones, 
172,  198;  use  on  door-socket,  217;  use  on  figures 
of  animals,  155,  158-161,  166,  167;  on  head-rest, 
220;  on  incised  ware,  71;  use  on  pottery  wares, 
74.  75.  76.  77.  78.  79.  80,  81,  82,  83,  84,  85,  86, 
87,  88-102,  103-104,  105-108,  iro-127,  132,  135, 
136-138;  use  on  ratdes,  167;  use  on  toilet  tables, 
219;  on  pottery  tubes,  217;  on  whistles,  167. 

Palestine,  gaming  piece  from,  169;  pottery  of,  69,  73, 
81,  124;  smelting  of  ores,  175. 

Palettes,  of  stone,  8,  15,  228. 

Palmetto  design,  1 36. 

Panjab,  viii. 

Pannier  head-dress,  153. 

Pans,  of  copper,  176-177;  in  pottery,  20,  30,  40,  43, 
55,  71,  72,  85,  86,  109,  114;  scale-,  178,  243; 
uses  of,  72,  177. 

Paring  of  beads,  208;  of  pottery,  79,  80,  83,  87,  105, 
109,  112,  115. 

Partitioned  trays,  45,  84. 

Passes,  V. 

Paste,  bangles,  191;  bead-amulet,  31,  41;  beads,  203, 


204,  206;  bird  figure  in,  35,  161;  cylinders  and 
plaques,  10,  20,  48,  53,  234-235. 

Patterns  (on  pottery),  see  Motifs;  (on  beads),  124,  201- 

202,  205,  207;  (on  copper  and  bronze),  196;  on 
bracelets,  191,  192. 

Pavements,  2-8,  13-16,  24,  27,  31,  38-41,  42,  44,  45, 
47,  48,  49,  50,  51,  60-63,  215.  2,18;  circular,  13, 
14,  50-51- 

Peacock,  as  motif  on  pottery,  88,  89,  91-92,  102. 

Peas,  samples  of,  250. 

Pebbles,  conversion  into  mace-heads,  224;  as  leather- 
tool,  228;  use  as  pohshers,  133;  use  as  weights,  7, 
226,  239,  242. 

Pedestals,  60,  218;  as  motif  on  pottery,  98-99;  supports 
for  figures  of  birds,  161,  167;  of  sandstone,  64,  230. 

Peg,  of  ivoiy.,  57,  233. 

Pegmatites,  209. 

Pelecypods,  list  of,  248. 

Pellets,  of  pottery,  8,  10,  19,  168;  on  model  animals, 
156,  158. 

Pendants,  in  metal,  190;  in  pottery,  203;  in  shell,  203, 
231;  in  steatite,  198,  202-203;  in  stone,  13,  202- 

203,  209;  worn  by  figurines,  154. 

Pent  roofs,  of  graves,  23. 

Pentacle  design,  69. 

Perforated  wares,  13,  14,  21,  55,  56,  82,  135. 

Periano-ghundai,  wares  of,  117,  130,  131. 

Persia,  amulets  from,  144;  arrow-heads  of,  183;  beads  of, 
200,  205,  206;  buttons  from,  197;  connections 
with,  112;  finger-rings  from,  194;  Highland  Cul- 
ture of,  123-124;  mace-heads  of,  225;  possible 
source  of  tin,  174;  pins  of,  195;  comparisons  with 
pottery  of,  69,  90,  91,  93,  96-98,  99,  100,  112,  117, 
ti8,  119,  121,  124-127,  129;  samples  of  wheat 
from,  250;  source  of  ancient  copper,  174;  as  trade 
route,  189. 

Pestles,  10,  229. 

Petal-shaped  motifs,  121. 

Personal  ornaments,  190-233. 

Pictographic  characters,  91,  99;  on  amulets,  68,  69,  70, 
100,  126,  143,  146,  147,  148-149;  on  axe,  178; 
on  beads,  201;  on  pottery,  7,  20,  21,  48,  68-70, 
126. 

Pig,  bones  of,  248;  model  of,  158. 

Pigeons,  as  model  birds  in  clay,  160. 

Pigments,  as  eye-paints,  134;  as  decorative  filling,  169, 
198,  205,  233. 

Pilgrims,  souvenirs  for,  193. 

Pink  slips,  67,  106,  111,  136. 

Pins,  with  coiled  heads,  ix,  21,  28,  194-195;  of  copper 
or  bronze,  ix,  21,  26-28,  31,  33,  43,  176,  185, 
189,  190,  194-196;  incised  patterns  on,  195,  196; 
of  ivory,  194;  of  Jhukar  make,  26,  27,  195;  types 
of.  194,  195. 

Pipal  motif,  on  pottery,  5,  66,  89,  93,  95,  118;  on  seal 
impression,  150. 

Pit,  \d,  7,  62. 

Pivot  holes,  217,  229. 

Plaques,  of  white  paste,  to,  48,  53,  234-235;  of  pottery, 
II,  57,  58.  69,  135,  223. 

Plant  motifs,  on  pottery,  5,  66,  75,  89,  91-95,  101,  102, 
108,  117-118,  120,  122,  126,  130,  136,  137. 

Plants,  sacred,  69,  93. 

Plasma,  beads  of,  209. 


334 


INDEX 


Platforms,  50;  for  ablutions,  62;  for  cooking  on,  24;  of 
mud-brick,  4,  15,  17,  18,  24,  37,  40,  41,  44,  48; 
for  sleeping  on,  61,  62. 

Platters,  of  copper  or  bronze,  48,  177;  of  pottery,  80. 

Plumage,  on  clay  model  birds,  155,  159,  160,  161,  167. 

Plumb-bobs,  81,  187,  229,  231. 

Polychrome  pottery,  48,  67,  79,  88,  91,  104,  107,  128, 
130,  135-137,  145- 

Portugal,  ancient  arrow-heads  of,  183;  cranial  types  of, 
259. 

Pot-marks,  19,  21,  25,  68-70,  108. 

Potters,  73,  94,  102,  127,  133,  216. 

Pottery  wares,  Asia  Minor,  comparisons  with  wares  of, 
III;  making  of,  67,  70,  86,  104,  112,  133; 
Baluchistan,  comparisons  with  wares  from,  69,  71, 
81,  85,  90,  91,  96,  97,  100,  1 17-120,  121-122,  124, 
126,  129-130,  132,  134,  137,  143;  Bosnia,  com- 
parisons with  wares  from,  iii;  bowls,  3,  9,  14,  19, 
20,  21,  25,  26,  27,  33-36,  53,  54,  55-57,  58,  66, 
68,  78,  80,  86,  88,  no,  in;  braziers,  82,  83; 
breaking  of  ritual  vessels,  in;  carinated  forms,  75, 
77,  78,  82,  133;  chalice  forms,  no,  in;  clays  of, 
66,  104,  132-135,  138;  classification  of  types,  73- 
88,  110-116;  coarse  ware,  73,  109,  116;  compari- 
sons between  Harappa  and  Jhukar  wares,  1 03-1 04, 
in,  1 27-1 29;  comparisons  between  Jhukar  and 
Trihni  wares,  136;  comhed  ware,  98,  108;  com- 
partment dish,  45,  84;  containers  for  oil,  76;  con- 
tents of,  51,  85,  115,  116,  176,  251,  252;  cooking 
vessels,  24,  113,  116;  cordoned  jars,  85,  109,  112; 
corrugated  wares,  10,  13,  82,  85,  109,  114;  cos- 
metic jars,  4,  6,  7,  9,  n,  16,  20,  35,  41,  55,  56, 
58,  68,  77,  122,  132-134,  139,  250-251;  Cretan 
wares,  comparisons  with,  in,  123,  126;  cups,  8, 
56,  74.  75.  79.  87.  III.  irfi;  cut  wares,  57,  73,  98, 
220;  degraissants,  66,  104,  133-135,  138,  219; 
differences  between  Jhukar  and  Harappa  wares, 
103-104,  117,  118,  127-129;  dishes,  of  food-stands, 
5.  13.  15.  17.  35.  39.  41.  53.  57.  65.  67,  7°.  7i. 
74'75.  79.  80,  106,  109,  116-117,  119.  121.  li'i. 
130,  204;  drab  wares,  66,  104,  113,  114,  116,  144, 
170,  173,  223;  Egypt,  comparisons  with  pottery  of, 
70)  73.  96.  Ill;  Elam,  comparisons  with  wares  of, 
90,  91,  96,  98,  100,  117,  119,  124,  125;  feeding- 
cups,  9,  54-56,  84,  217;  food-stands,  3,  5,  7,  10, 
13,  15,  17,  26,  29,  32,  35,  39,  41,  65,  67,  70,  71, 
74,  75,  106-111,  116-117,  I 19.  Iii.  Ii3.  lib.  Ii8, 
130.  135.  177.  i°4;  footed  vessels,  9,  25,  no,  in, 
112;  from  very  early  levels,  65;  globular  vessels, 
83,  114-115;  grey  wares,  23,  66,  76,  77,  80,  82, 
104,  132-134,  140,  170,  204,  208,  220;  groups  of, 
3.  7.  53.  54.  56,  57.  86,  133,  135,  137;  guide 
markings  on,  73,  94,  108;  handled  vessels,  8,  9, 
10,  22,  54,  82,  108,  109,  113;  hand-made,  67,  69, 
77-79,  80,  81,  102,  104,  105,  109,  112,  113,  115, 

1 16,  132,  133;  of  Harappa  Culture,  65-102;  incised 
wares,  10,  19,  21-23,  25-27,  54,  57,  65,  70-72,  75, 
76,  78,  82,  98,  108-110,  113,  125,  128,  132,  134; 
incurved  bases,  78,  85;  Indo-Sassanian,  103;  in- 
scribed, 7,  20,  21,  48,  68-70,  91,  99,  126;  insect 
cages,  9,  56,  77;  from  Iraq,  94,  96,  97,  100,  119, 
122,  125,  127;  from  Italy,  81;  Jai-damb,  compari- 
sons with  pottery  from,  119,  130;  jar-covers,  10, 
13.  21,  26,  33,  35,  54,  56,  58,  79-81,  94,  108, 


112,  113,  128,  142;  jar-stands,  n,  21,  26,  28,  50, 
54,  55,  60,  70,  73,  82,  98,  108,  113;  jar-stoppers, 
14,  21,  28,  32,  35,  56,  79,  81,  222;  Jemdet 
Nasr,  comparisons  with  pottery  from,  117,  120; 
Jhangar  wares,  23-24,  112,  132-138,  140,  143; 
Jhukar  wares,  29,  30,  32,  34,  49,  95,  100-102, 
103-13 1 ; Jhukar  wares  compared  with  Baluchi 
wares,  109,  119,  126,  129-131;  Jhukar  wares  and 
Tell  Halaf  wares,  96,  126,  127,  129;  kilns  for,  70; 
late  wares,  23,  117,  132-138;  ledges  to  take  covets, 
86,  114;  libation  v'essels,  87;  lugged  vessels,  19, 

20,  109;  made  on  coil  system,  77,  86;  Mesopo- 
tamian pottery,  comparisons  with,  72,  73,  94,  96, 
98,  99,  100,  in,  117,  119,  120-125,  127;  minia- 
ture jars,  43,  79,  81,  83-84,  114,  177;  moulded 
bases,  75,  76;  narrow-based,  75,  78,  87;  narrow- 
mouthed,  77,  78;  new  types  of,  87-88;  oval  dishes, 
54,  87;  paints  used  on,  76-87,  88-102,  1 03-1 04, 
105-108,  no-127,  132,  135,  136-138;  pans,  20,  30, 
40.  43.  55.  71.  7i.  85.  86,  109,  114;  paring  of,  79, 
80,  83,  87,  105,  109,  112,  115;  perforated  wares, 
13,  14,  21,  55,  56,  82,  135;  Persian  pottery,  com- 
parisons with,  69,  90,  91,  93,  96-99,  100,  112,  117, 
118,  119,  121,  124-125,  127,  129;  platters,  80; 
polishing  of,  23,  66-67,  75.  77.  94.  I04.  io5.  1I5. 
I33'I34;  polychrome  wares,  48,  67,  79,  88,  91, 
104,  107,  128,  130,  135-137.  145;  pot-marks,  19, 

21,  25,  68-70,  108;  relief  work,  109;  repairing  of, 
67-68,  79,  80,  88;  reserved  slips,  21,  65,  72;  rims 
of,  68;  ring-based,  68,  75,  86,  88,  no;  ritual  vessels, 
71.  79.  83,  99;  round-based  jars,  115;  Samatra 
wares,  comparisons  with,  91,  99,  100,  120,  122- 
125;  sand-coated  jars,  72,  86,  105,  135,  138; 
scoring  of,  75,  76,  88,  133;  seal  impressions  on, 
68;  Sicily,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  in;  slings 
for,  68,  97,  99;  slips  on,  66,  67,  71,  74,  75,  76-88, 
89,  90,  104-107,  111-114,  115,  117-119,  126,  127, 
128,  132,  135-136,  138;  Spain,  comparisons  with 
pottery  of,  in;  spouted  vessels,  32,  109,  112,  217; 
storage  jars,  2,  3,  5-7,  10,  27,  29,  30,  39-42,  43, 
45,  48-52.  54.  67-68,  72,  78,  79,  81,  83,  84,  85-86, 
89,  93,  94,  99,  loi,  105,  107,  109,  114,  116,  1 17, 
118,  121,  122,  125,  126,  248,  251,  252-253;  as 
stoppers,  79;  straw-markings  on,  104,  133,  134, 
223;  string  marks  on  bases,  76,  88,  104,  in,  116; 
suspended  vessels,  68,  76,  77,  84;  Tell  Halaf, 
comparisons  with  pottery  of,  94,  95-97,  98,  100, 
117,  119-122,  123,  124-127,  129,  130,  145;  triad 
forms,  132-134,  143;  Trihni  wares,  135-137;  trim- 
ming of,  67,  79,  80,  83,  87,  88,  105,  109,  112, 
115;  tumblers,  9,  16,  20-22,  87;  use  of  tools  upon, 
71,  72,  73,  75,  108-109,  1 13;  use  of,  to  roof  graves, 
23.  137-138;  water-jars,  72,  73,  79,  114,  147;  work 
of  children,  67;  workshops  for  making,  193. 

Pounders,  229. 

Prasna  Upanishad,  240. 

Privies,  33,  38,  39,  41,  47-50.  61,  62,  63,  215,  216. 

Proto-Mediterranean  type,  256-257,  258,  259. 

Pulley,  58. 

Punch-marks  on  metal,  69,  177. 

Pusa,  250. 

Quartz,  as  abrasive,  179;  beads  of,  204,  209;  use  with 
saw,  211;  grains  of,  251. 


INDEX 


335 


Quartzite,  weights  of,  226,  227. 

Querns,  4,  151-152,  227-228. 

Rai  grain,  deposit  of,  250. 

Ram  chariots,  as  clay  toys,  50,  159,  165-166. 

Ram  figures,  in  faience,  160;  human-headed  on  seals, 
158;  in  pottery,  50,  54-55,  158,  159,  160,  233. 

Rare  motifs  on  pottery,  66,  126-127. 

Ratios  of  weights,  236,  237,  238-239,  240,  241-245. 

Ratdes,  in  pottery,  7,  9,  20,  33,  54,  56,  63,  167;  in 
hen  form,  45,  167. 

Ravines,  i,  59,  141. 

Rays,  on  pottery,  95. 

Razors,  2,  3,  35,  43,  44,  52,  56,  57,  176,  182-183; 
tangs  of,  182. 

Recessed  fireplaces,  24,  29,  32. 

Red  bands  on  pottery,  106,  107,  no,  114,  116,  117, 
121,  128,  129,  136,  138. 

Red  ochre,  use  for  paint  and  slips,  66-67,  103-104,  105- 
106,  107,  156-159;  use  on  seals,  146;  stick  of, 
28,  235. 

Reed  stands,  98-99. 

Relief  work  on  pottery,  109. 

Repairs,  to  pottery,  67-68,  79,  80,  88;  to  seal-amulets, 
146. 

Reserved  slips,  21,  65-67,  72. 

Resin,  as  filling  for  bracelets,  191;  use  of  on  pottery, 
133- 

Rhinoceros,  on  Jhukar  bead  amulet,  142,  144;  pottery 
model  of,  41,  159. 

Rhomb  motifs,  on  pottery,  100-101,  120,  124,  127-129. 

Ribbing,  on  pottery,  10,  13,  82,  85,  109,  114. 

Ribbon-flakes,  as  knives,  to,  11,  135,  230. 

Ring-bases,  on  potter)-,  68,  75,  86,  88,  no. 

Rings,  of  copper  or  bronze,  21,  33,  34,  51,  53,  57.  62, 
190,  193-194;  of  clay,  6,  194. 

Ritual  use  of  pottery,  79. 

Ritual  vessels,  71,  79,  83,  99. 

Rivers,  v,  18,  19,  63,  90,  165,  233,  248-250,  254. 

Rivet-holes,  in  bracelet,  192;  in  lance-head,  180;  in 
metal  knives,  i8t,  182;  in  pottery  vessels,  67,  68, 
88;  in  stone  dish,  138,  231. 

Rods,  copper  and  bronze,  185,  190;  faience,  205. 

Roller,  of  bone,  234. 

Rollestone,  England,  182. 

Rolling-pins,  in  pottery,  220-221. 

Roofs,  51;  beams  for,  60;  of  graves,  23;  of  houses,  63, 
217;  of  vehicles,  164. 

Rooms,  numbering  of,  vi. 

Rope  motif,  on  Jhukar  amulet,  142,  144. 

Rope  slings,  for  carrying  jars,  68,  97,  99;  for  carts,  162. 

Rosette  motifs,  on  pottery,  94,  100,  to8,  125,  128. 

Roundels,  as  motif  on  pottery,  72,  88,  96,  137. 

Rubbers,  for  finishing  objects,  11,  229,  230. 

Runnels,  56,  58,  216-217. 

Running  animal,  on  jar,  130. 

Sacred  things,  animals,  233;  bangles,  193;  birds,  91; 
cords  worn  by  figurines,  154;  patterns  on  pottery, 
69,  71;  processions,  157;  rivers,  233;  supports  for, 
99;  trees,  93. 

Saddle-cloths,  on  animals  on  seals,  147,  148. 

Saddle-querns,  4,  1 51-151.  227-228. 

Saints,  v,  vi,  1. 


Sakrand,  town  of,  v,  vi. 

Saligram,  71. 

Salt,  action  of,  1,  145,  155,  175,  182. 

Samarra,  references  to  painted  pottery  of,  91,  99,  100, 
120,  122-125. 

Sambar  deer,  horns  of,  49,  53,  246,  248. 

Sand,  coating  on  pottery,  72,  86,  105,  135,  138;  as 
degraissant,  66,  135,  216,  217,  219. 

Sandstone,  as  abrasive,  229;  blocks  for  bead  working, 
10,  40,  45,  213-214,  227;  dish,  138;  hones,  227; 
macehead,  224.  pedestal,  230;  plaque,  223;  rubber, 
229. 

Sankha  shell,  169. 

Sardinia,  sanctity  of  dove  in,  161. 

Sar  Parom,  130. 

Saws,  of  bronze,  179;  of  chert,  56,  230;  use  on  agate 
nodules,  211;  use  on  bone,  27,  53;  use  on  bricks, 
48,  53,  218;  use  on  ivory,  196;  use  on  shell,  192; 
use  on  stone,  145,  179,  209,  211. 

Scale  pattern,  on  pottery,  97,  121. 

Scales,  212;  beams  of,  53,  57,  178,  185;  pans  of,  178, 
243;  use  for  beads,  212,  243. 

Scoring,  on  bases  of  jars,  88,  104,  111,  116,  139. 

Scripts,  Harappa,  68,  70,  91,  99,  127,  143,  148-149; 
Hittite,  91,  127;  Minoan,  96. 

Scythian  shield,  126. 

Seal-amulets,  145-150;  engraving  of,  143,  145,  146,  147; 
of  Harappa  period,  145-149;  of  Jhukar  period,  140- 
145;  materials  of,  148;  levels  of,  141,  149. 

Sealings,  95,  149-150. 

Seals,  viii,  6,  8,  9,  11,  15,  20,  33-35.  39-41.  43,  45,  46, 
47,  48-52,  54-58,  64,  140-150,  157,  209-210;  of 
bronze,  19,  142C?);  Cappadocian,  93,  144;  of 
copper  from  Shahl-tump,  143;  Cretan,  96,  119; 
Egyptian,  91;  Hittite,  96,  144;  impressions  of,  68, 
140,  149-150;  Jhukar,  140-150;  Kassite,  124; 
makers  of,  44,  50;  motifs  on,  93,  95,  too,  tot, 
124,  142,  144,  146-148,  157,  158,  159;  round,  50, 
143;  signs  on,  68,  69,  70,  too,  126,  146,  147,  148- 
149,  201;  of  Sumer,  96;  of  Susa,  100;  use  of  com- 
pressed steatite  in  making,  210;  unfinished,  4,  28, 
50,  52,  145,  146,  148,  243;  whitening  of,  148. 

Seat,  30,  62. 

Seeds,  samples  of,  31,  51,  250;  use  in  game,  169. 

Segmented  beads,  205. 

Sehwan,  tovm  of,  132. 

Sequences  in  weights,  241. 

Serpents,  v;  represented  on  amulets,  91,  142;  on  pottery, 
91,  99,  126. 

Settlements,  129,  133. 

Sewers,  see  Drains. 

Shafts  of  spear  heads,  180. 

Shah  Hasan,  pottery  of,  137;  village  of,  135. 

Shahl-tump,  references  to  painted  pottery  of,  96,  97, 
124,  134;  seals  from,  143. 

Shah  Tepe,  259. 

Sheet  metal,  objects  cut  from,  179,  181,  183,  190-191. 

Shell,  balls  of,  28,  43,  53,  168;  bangles  of,  48,  53,  192, 
231,  232;  beads  of,  53,  204,  205,  207,  209,  231; 
carved,  28,  43,  233;  cones  of,  28,  41,  43,  49,  54, 
171-173,  198,  232;  dishes  of,  33,  35,  40,  43,  45, 
53,  54,  232;  factory  for  working,  28;  feeding-cups, 
43,  231-232;  gamesmen  of,  19,  169;  head-cones  of, 
198,  208,  232;  incising  of,  198,  231;  inlay,  63, 


336 


INDEX 


230,  232,  234;  jar-stopper  of,  44-45,  231;  ladles  of, 
28,  57,  62,  231,  232;  lamps  of,  232;  natural,  43, 
5I)  53>  85,  176,  192,  231,  253;  objects  of,  22,  43, 
53,  231-233;  pendants  of,  203-231;  plumb-bob  of, 
231;  spoons  of,  232;  working  of,  28,  43,  53,  192. 

Shells,  ammonite,  71,  204,  223;  as  beads,  207-208; 
contained  in  jar,  85,  176,  252-253;  conch,  252- 
253;  cowries,  207;  as  emblems  of  the  sea,  233; 
fossil,  14,  63,  71,  204,  230,  231;  fresh-water 
species,  248-250;  holes  in,  231;  kept  as  curios,  14, 
230;  as  motif  on  pottery,  71,  204;  species  of,  248- 
250. 

Shield-like  device,  on  pottery,  see  Figure-of-eight. 

Shop-keepers,  76. 

Shops,  druggist,  53. 

Shovel,  of  bronze,  187. 

Shrines,  193;  objects  deposited  in,  154,  161. 

Shuruppak,  mace-head  from,  224. 

Sialk,  coiled  pins  from,  195-196;  crania,  256,  259; 
pottery  motifs,  118. 

Sicily,  pottery  of,  in. 

Sikh  beard,  153. 

Silica  paste,  for  glazing,  10,  20,  48,  53,  234-235. 

Sills  (of  doorways),  4,  16,  29,  30,  32,  41,  42-44,  48,  60. 

Silver,  head-cones  of,  198;  jewellery,  190,  194;  vessels 
of,  79;  weights  used  for  weighing,  244. 

Sinai,  smelting  of  ores  in,  175. 

Sindh,  ancient  sites,  v,  65,  67,  98,  103,  no,  126,  128, 
130,  191;  beads  of,  200,  207,  Bhils  in,  133;  carts 
in,  162,  163;  pottery  of,  67,  72,  lor,  102,  107, 
117,  136,  138;  pottery-making,  102,  107,  137;  use 
of  balls  as  missiles,  169;  workmen  of,  vii,  i. 

Sistan,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  120,  123,  124,  126, 
127. 

Skeletons,  2,  4,  23. 

Skirtings  (of  walls  and  pavements),  6,  15,  38,  41,  49, 
50,  62. 

Skirts,  worn  by  figurines,  154. 

Skull,  252-263;  age  and  sex  of,  254,  258;  circumstances 
of  find,  51,  85,  176,  252;  comparisons  with  other 
cranial  material,  256-258,  263;  condition  of,  254; 
composite  character  of,  258-259;  craniologic  ob- 
servations, 254-255;  description  of,  253;  dishar- 
monic  features  of,  255,  257,  259;  negro  traits  in, 
257-259;  tables  of  measurement  of,  261,  262,  263; 
teeth  of,  253-255. 

Sleeping  platforms,  61,  62. 

Slings,  to  carry  pottery,  68,  97,  99;  use  with  clay 
pellets,  168. 

Slips  and  paints,  black  and  grey,  66,  74,  76,  80,  106, 
135,  172,  175,  208,  220;  brown,  67,  79,  85,  86, 
107,  136,  172;  buff,  67;  cherry-coloured,  220; 
cream,  67,  79,  86,  105,  114,  136,  158;  description 
of,  66,  67;  grey,  66,  74,  76,  106,  133,  175;  pink, 
67,  106,  III,  136,  160;  polished,  66-67,  94,  104, 
105,  1 15,  133;  red,  67,  104,  107,  156-159,  161, 
162,  193;  reserved,  21,  65-67,  72;  water-tight,  79, 
85,  86;  white,  67;  use  of  resin  as,  133;  yellow,  67, 
88,  107,  1 14,  136,  160. 

Sloping  walls,  2,  5,  31. 

Socketed  axe,  30,  188-189. 

Solar  S5Tnbols,  68,  75,  80,  92,  95-97,  100,  loi,  109, 
123;  on  Anatolian  pottery  and  seals,  96;  in  asso- 
ciation with  homed  animals,  95;  on  Baluchistan 


wares,  96;  on  coins,  95;  on  Cretan  seals,  96;  as 
ornaments,  69,  96;  on  Persian  wares,  97;  on  seals 
and  amulets,  119,  142. 

Solomon  Islands,  use  of  paddle  on  pottery,  135. 

Soot,  as  cosmetic,  77,  134,  250-251. 

Spacers,  202. 

Spain,  arrow-heads  of,  183;  crania  of,  259;  pottery  of, 

III. 

Spatula,  186. 

Spear-heads,  48,  57,  180;  casting  of,  180;  from  Cyclades, 
1 80;  from  Cyprus,  180;  tangs  of,  180;  tie-holes  in, 
180. 

Spectographic  analysis,  of  beads,  213;  of  metal,  174. 

Spherical  mace-heads,  224-225;  weights,  239,  242. 

Spigots,  of  drain-pipes,  215. 

Spindle-whorls,  13,  20,  64,  221. 

Spiral  patterns  on  pottery,  70-71,  75,  76,  88,  109,  112. 

Spoons,  of  pottery,  33,  221;  of  shell,  232. 

Sports,  bull  fighting,  157. 

Spot  motifs,  on  pottery,  95,  108,  112,  115,  121,  125, 
126,  136,  137,  138. 

Spouted  jars,  32,  109,  112,  217. 

Squares,  numbering  of,  vii. 

Squirrel,  pictured  on  pottery,  88,  90,  102. 

Stags,  antlers  of,  27,  29,  49,  53,  246,  248. 

Stairways,  42,  51,  63. 

Standard,  on  seal  impression,  150. 

Standard  unit  of  weights,  236,  237,  239,  240. 

Stands,  of  pottery,  9,  10,  15,  21,  60,  73,  219;  of  stone, 
64,  230;  supporting  dove  figures,  160,  161. 

Star  pattern,  on  pottery,  69,  108. 

Stave-heads,  157,  187. 

Steatite,  alkali  treatment  of,  148;  colours  of,  209,  210; 
compressed,  145,  209;  dish  of,  138;  firing  of,  210, 
212;  reforming  of,  145,  187,  209,  210;  use  of  saw 
upon,  145,  179. 

Stone,  amulets,  19,  20,  25,  140-143,  148;  blanks  for 
beads,  210;  bowls  and  dishes  of,  32,  55,  138,  231; 
buttons  of,  197;  cylinders,  60,  228,  229;  drills  of, 
15,  40,  41,  43,  48-50,  52,  57,  58,  210-213,  230; 
hones  of,  10,  14,  32,  34,  35,  40,  55,  58,  227,  228; 
objects  of,  224-231;  use  for  beads,  199-202,  203- 
204,  206-207,  208-211,  212,  214;  working  of,  63, 
179- 

Stoppers,  in  pottery,  14,  21,  28,  32,  35,  56,  79,  81, 
222;  in  shell,  44-45,  231;  small  jar  used  as,  81. 

Storage  jars,  2,  3,  5-7,  10,  27,  29,  30,  39-42,  43,  45, 
48-52,  54,  67-68,  72,  78,  79,  81,  83,  84,  85-86, 
89.  93»  94>  99,  loi,  105,  107,  109,  1 14,  1 16,  1 17, 
118,  121,  122,  125,  126,  248,  251,  252-253;  bases 
of,  75,  78,  85,  86;  as  cess  pits,  6,  39,  40,  42,  45, 
48,  49,  51,  85,  215;  contents  of,  51,  85,  176,  251- 
252;  models  of,  84;  use  to  support  drains,  6,  45,  85. 

Stories,  of  houses,  51,  63. 

Strata  of  occupations,  9,  12,  16-18,  24,  27,  34,  37,  38, 
103,  132. 

Straw-pitted  pottery,  104,  133,  134,  223. 

Streets,  38,  39,  40,  41,  45-50,  59,  61;  description  of, 
38,  39;  lay-out  of,  38-39. 

String  grooves  on  bases  of  pottery,  76,  88,  104,  iii, 
116,  139. 

Stores  of  grain,  31,  51. 

Subsidences,  of  drains,  46,  61,  243;  floors,  14,  15,  31, 


INDEX 


337 


49;  of  masonry,  2,  12,  29-32,  34,  42;  of  mound, 
30,  31. 

Sub-soil  water  levels,  9,  12,  17-19,  65. 

Sumer,  arrowheads  of,  183;  ass,  as  draught  animal,  165; 
axes  of,  189;  beads  of,  190,  201-203,  ^05,  212, 
213;  cones  of,  171;  drain-pipes  of,  216;  dove  figures 
of,  161;  feeding-cups  of,  232;  figurines  of,  153,  155; 
finger-rings  of,  194;  fluted  vessels  of,  177;  im- 
portations from,  203;  jewellery  of,  194,  199;  mace- 
heads  from,  224-225;  metal  vessels,  177;  model 
vehicles  of,  163,  164;  pottery  stands  of,  98-99; 
razors  of,  183;  references  to  wares  of,  81,  85,  87, 
96,  98,  99,  too,  J12,  1 17,  1 1 9;  sanctity  of  dove 
in,  161;  seals  of,  69,  93,  96,  148,  201;  sites  in, 
73,  216;  tetrahedral  gamesmen,  169. 

Sun  worship,  92. 

Sur  Jangal  pottery,  130. 

Susa,  comparisons  with  pottery  of,  73,  96,  98,  99,  100, 
122,  124;  mace-heads  from,  224;  seals  of,  too. 

Suspended  vessels,  68,  76,  77,  84. 

Swastika,  95;  on  amulets,  97;  on  Baluchistan  wares, 
97;  on  Harappa  seals,  97;  on  Samarra  pottery,  123. 

Sweat-houses,  42. 

Sweden,  sun  symbol,  96. 

Syria,  pottery  of,  94,  124,  129,  145;  as  source  of  Tell 
Halaf  civilization,  129. 

Tables,  10,  15,  21,  218-219;  model  of,  9,  53. 

Tablets  (copper),  from  Mohenjo-daro,  91,  146;  (clay) 
from  Jemdet  Nasr,  69. 

Tails,  of  model  animals,  158,  159,  166. 

Tando  Rahim  Khan,  references  to  pottery  of,  128. 

Tangs,  222;  of  arrow-heads,  183,  184;  of  chisels,  184;  of 
knives,  180,  181;  of  razors,  182. 

Taxila,  reference  to  beads  of,  200. 

Teeth,  of  goat  or  sheep,  248;  of  human  skull,  253-255; 
from  image  of  deity  (?),  233;  of  model  animals, 
158. 

Tell  al  Judaidah,  259. 

Tell  Asmar,  beads  of,  200,  201;  drain-pipes  of,  216; 
seals  of,  96;  stands  of,  73. 

Tell  Chagar  Bazar,  references  to  pottery  of,  94,  119. 

Tell  Halaf  pottery,  comparisons  with,  95,  117,  1 19-122, 
129,  130;  references  to  motifs  on,  96-98,  too,  119, 
120,  124-127,  145. 

Tell-i-pir,  Hataj,  99. 

Tempering  materials  for  pottery,  66,  104,  I33-I35>  138, 
219. 

Temples,  souvenirs  from,  193;  vessels  in,  99. 

Tepe  All  Abad,  1 17. 

Tepe  Gawra,  121,  225. 

Tepe  Giyan,  aOusions  to  pottery  of,  69,  97,  99,  118. 

Tepe  Hissar,  axes  of,  188,  194,  195;  beads  of,  200,  205; 
crania,  256,  257,  262;  fillets  of,  194;  pins  of,  195. 

Tepe  Sialk,  crania,  256,  259;  motifs  on  pottery  of,  118; 
pins  from,  195-196. 

Terminal  beads,  202,  207. 

Tetrahedral  gamesmen,  169,  244,  246. 

Tetrahedrons,  244,  246. 

Thank-offerings,  vi. 

Thebes,  Egypt,  96. 

Thongs,  for  mace-heads,  225;  for  razors,  182;  for  spear- 
heads, 180. 

Three-animal  motifs,  on  seal  impression,  148,  150. 


Thresholds,  decoration  of,  95. 

Tibet,  beads  of,  200. 

Tie-holes,  in  spear-heads,  180. 

Tiger,  clay  model  of,  158;  appearance  on  seals  and 
sealings,  147,  150,  158;  conjoined  tiger  figures  on 
sealing,  147. 

Tigris  river,  19. 

Tin,  ores  of,  175;  possible  sources  of,  174;  proportions 
in  bronze,  174. 

Tines  of  antlers,  29,  246. 

Toilet,  article  for,  235;  tables  for,  9,  10,  15,  21,  53, 
219. 

Tombs,  of  late  date,  v-vi,  23,  138. 

Tonga,  165. 

Tools  and  implements,  174-189;  for  bead-making,  34, 
40,  45,  56,  57,  186,  187,  210-212,  213,  214,  243; 
use  on  amulets,  144,  145-146;  use  on  stone,  229. 

Torches,  perforated  ware  possibly  used  as,  82,  83. 

Town-planning,  38-39. 

Toy  vehicles,  in  bronze,  39,  41,  52,  164-165;  in  pottery, 
3,  9,  15,  21,  35,  56,  135,  152,  156,  162-164. 

Toys  and  Playthings,  3,  9,  15,  21,  35,  39,  41,  44,  50, 
52,  55,  56,  135,  156,  160,  162-173. 

Trade  relations,  Baluchistan  and  India,  71,  129,  130, 
175- 

Trade  routes,  v,  189,  195. 

Traders,  71,  129,  226. 

Transjordan,  216. 

Trappings,  on  animal  figures,  147,  148,  159. 

Trays  (partitioned),  45,  84. 

Tree  motifs,  on  pottery,  88,  89,  93-94;  on  seals  and 
amulets,  93,  142,  147. 

Trees,  jhal,  vi;  khair,  93;  nim,  93;  sacred,  93. 

Trefoil  motif,  on  beads,  205;  in  sculpture,  201. 

Trenches,  description  of,  i-ir,  59;  firing  of  pottery  in, 
104. 

Triad  forms  of  pottery,  1 32-1 34,  143. 

Trial  inscriptions,  4,  146. 

Triangular  motifs,  on  pottery,  69,  70,  too,  114,  122, 

123.  133.  134- 

Triangular  openings  in  pottery,  73,  220. 

Triangular  pottery  plaques,  58,  135. 

Tribes,  133. 

Trihni,  mound  of,  135. 

Trihni  wares,  comparisons  with,  117,  121,  135-137: 
dating  of,  136;  description  of,  135-137;  motifs  on, 
I36>  137;  paints  and  slips  used  on,  67,  135,  136. 

Trimming  of  pottery,  67,  79,  80,  83,  87,  88,  105,  109, 
112,  115. 

Troy,  brushes  of,  223;  pins  of,  195. 

Tubes  of  pottery,  14,  22,  35,  55,  58,  217. 

Tubular  beads,  199,  203. 

Tubular  drills,  55,  186,  225. 

Tumblers,  of  pottery,  9,  16,  20-22,  87. 

Tusk,  14. 

Ur,  beads,  200,  201,  205,  213;  bird-models  from,  161; 
crania,  256,  262;  drain-pipes,  216;  fillets,  194;  four- 
wheeled  wagons,  164;  gamesmen,  169;  gold  knife, 
181;  ornaments  from,  199;  pottery  of,  72,  122, 

124,  127;  seals  from,  148. 

Uruk,  171. 

Urus  animal,  on  seal-amulets,  loi,  146-148. 


33»  INDEX 


Utensils,  of  copper  and  bronze,  3,  29,  3t,  48,  79,  176- 
178,  212. 

Vegetable  remains,  250,  251. 

Vehicles,  models  of,  3,  9,  15,  21,  35,  39,  41,  52,  56, 
135,  152,  162-165;  drivers  of,  152,  163,  164. 

Ventilation  gratings,  60,  73,  218. 

Ventilation  holes,  in  pottery,  73,  86,  113. 

Vitreous  paste,  beads  of,  206;  bracelets  of,  191. 

Votive  offerings,  154,  161,  173,  223. 

Wafer  beads,  53,  186,  205,  209,  212. 

Walls,  alignment  of,  12,  13,  16,  24,  37;  batter  of,  2, 
5,  31;  buttresses,  5,  14,  30,  32,  60;  footings  of,  i, 
13j  tb,  38,  47,  61;  of  mud-briclc,  44,  49,  52; 
raising  of,  in  Jhukar  period,  12-13,  2.4,  29,  32-34; 
of  unusual  size,  1,  3,  5,  8. 

Washing  pavement,  15. 

Water,  -carrier  as  pictograph,  147;  -chutes,  5,  16,  218; 
-creatures,  92,  93;  -jars,  72,  73,  79,  114,  147; 
-levels,  9,  12,  17-19,  65,  135;  -plants  on  pottery, 
91,  92,  93,  1 18;  representation  on  pottery,  91; 
-skins,  stoppers  for,  81,  231;  tubes  for,  217;  -tight 
slips,  79,  85,  86. 

Weaving,  bobbins  for  C?),  170. 

Wedge-shaped  bricks,  4,  17. 

Weights,  34,  52,  53,  56,  57,  64,  225-227,  236-246; 
binary  system  of,  244;  condition  of,  242;  cube 
forms,  226,  236,  239,  242,  244,  247;  distribution 
of  unit,  237,  239;  divergent,  236,  237;  find-spots 
of,  243;  finish  of,  52;  fractional  ratios,  241,  243- 
244,  245;  frequency  of  distribution,  236,  237,  240; 
from  Harappa,  236,  237,  240,  242-244;  list  of,  238, 
239;  materials  made  of,  226-227,  236,  241,  242, 
244;  mode  or  value  of  maximum  frequency,  236, 
237,  240;  from  Mohenjo-daro,  226,  236,  237,  240, 
241,  242,  243,  244;  pebble-,  7,  226,  239,  242; 
possible  examples,  244,  246;  ratios  of,  236,  237, 


238-239,  240,  241-244;  spherical,  239,  242;  stand- 
ard unit  of,  236,  237,  239,  240;  system  of  weighing, 
240;  types  of,  226,  239,  244;  unfinished,  27,  48, 
52,  226,  236,  242,  243;  unit  value  of,  242. 

Wells,  4,  17. 

Western  Reserve  University,  Cleveland,  252,  253. 

Wheat,  deposits  of,  31,  250. 

Wheeled  vehicles,  invention  of,  164. 

Wheels,  of  model  vehicles,  9,  10,  ii,  50,  60,  156,  162- 
164,  165-166;  sizes  and  types  of,  165. 

Whetstones,  55,  227. 

Whistles,  5,  45,  54,  55,  57,  167;  in  shape  of  hen,  45, 
167. 

White  slips,  67. 

Whorls,  of  pottery,  13,  20,  64,  221. 

Wickerwork,  mangers  of,  147;  shown  on  model  carts, 
163. 

Wild  goat,  home  of,  90. 

Wings,  of  figures  of  birds,  160,  161. 

Wire  (copper),  143,  176,  181,  184,  190,  193,  210. 

Wood,  handles,  181,  183,  184;  used  to  strengthen 
weapons,  179-180;  -working,  184. 

Workshops,  for  beads,  41-44,  45,  46,  49,  50,  205,  209, 
210,  213,  214,  226,  243,  244;  for  glazing,  53,  63; 
for  metal  working,  40,  52;  seal-making,  50;  shell- 
working, 28,  43,  53,  192;  stone  working,  48,  63, 
243;  weight-making,  48,  226,  243. 

Writing,  in  Harappa  period,  143;  in  Jhukar  period, 
143;  resemblances  between  Harappa  and  Hittite 
scripts,  127. 

Yellow  slips,  67,  88,  107,  114,  136,  160. 

Yokes,  for  oxen,  156,  165;  for  water-jars,  147. 

Zangian-damb,  samples  of  bronze  from,  175. 

ZarAas,  vi,  vii,  i. 

Zayak  valley,  pottery  of,  119. 

Zhob-Thal,  pottery  of,  122. 

Zig-zag  patterns  on  pottery,  109,  129,  133,  136,  137. 


PLATES 


CHANHU  DARO:  CONTOUR  MAP 
OF  THE  SITE 


PLATE  I 


SCALE 


CHANHU-DARO:  SECTIONS  OF  MOUND  II 


PLATE  V 


MOUND  H SECTION  OF  WESTERN  SIDE  OF  CUTTING 


FURNACE  ; HARAPPA 


CHANHU-DARO:  VARIOUS  VIEWS  OF  MOUNDS 


PLATE  IX 


CHANHU-DARO:  MOUND  II,  TRENCHES 


PLATE  X 


CHANHU-DARO:  MOUND  II,  TRENCHES  PLATE  XI 


(e)  Trench  F(l},  from  south.  (f)  Trench  FCO,  from  north. 


CHANHU-DARO:  MOUND  II,  HARAPPA  I AND  II  LEVELS 


PLATE  XIII 


CHANHU-DARO:  VIEWS  OF  MOUND  11 


PLATE  XIV 


CHANHU-DARO:  DETAILS  IN  MOUNDS  I AND  II 


PLATE  XVI 


— 


(g)  Sq.  7/E,  from  east.  Drainage  jar  ( 
skull  at  locus  324.  Harappa  II 


(h)  Sq.  7/E,  from  south-east.  Skull  and  (i)  Sq.  9/D,  from  south-west, 
shell  in  jar.  Harappa  II  level.  Drainage  jars  at  locus  209. 

Harappa  II  level. 


PLATE  XX 


"M  li 


CHANHU-DARO:  MOUND  I,  VIEWS  OF  EXCAVATIONS 


PLATE  XXII 


' “‘r^eg—aei^ 

^ f JUST 


I f 

■ *.w 


'V 


Ca)  Mound  I.  View  of  excavations,  from  north-east.  Locus  25  in  foreground. 


Cb)  Mound  I.  Northern  side  of  excav'ations,  from  east.  Locus 
54  in  foreground. 


POTTERY  OF  THE  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  XXIII 


Painted  hy  Nina  de  Garis  Davies  and  Suzanne  E.  Chapman 


STORAGE  JARS:  HAR.APPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  XXIV 


Scale  1:12 


58 


60 


w w 


13 


14 


IS 


16 


18 


23 


28  29 


31 


32 


33 


35 


37 


43 


50  51 


'X  ^ " tX 

A w ■' JL  c£=, -ffr  <&  03 


53  54  55  56  57 


w 


) s r7  r7  “ “ 

67  59  70  72 

84  88  89  W)  91 


82 


Scale  1:16 


POTTERY:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  XXVII 


POTTERY  AND  POTTERY  GROUPS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  XXVIII 


POTTERY  AND  OTHER  OBJECTS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE  PLATE  XXIX 


Ill 


PLATE  XXXV 


POTTERY:  JHUKAR  CULTURE  PLATE  XLI 


Scale  1:6 


PAINTED  POTTERY:  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


PLATE  XLII 


PAINTED  POTTERY:  JHUKAR  CULTURE 


PLATE  XLVII 


INCISED  POTTERY:  JHUKAR  CUETURE 


PLATE  XLVIII 


MODEL  ANIMALS  IN  POTTERY 


PLATE  LVI 


PLATE  LVII 


TOYS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  LVIII 


GAMESMEN,  DICE  AND  CONES,  ETC. 


PLATE  LX 


Scale  1 : 1V4 


Scale  1:1 


Scale  1:2 


COPPER  AND  BRONZE  OBJECTS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  LXXIII 


Scale  1 :2 


BUTTONS  AND  OTHER  ORNAMENTS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  LXXVIII 


decorated  CARNELIAN  BEADS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  LXXIX 


Scale  2:1 


Scale  1:1 


Scale  1 : 1 


STONE  AND  FAIENCE  BEADS:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  LXXXIII 


Scale  1:1 


Scale  1:2 


Scale  1:2 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS  (HARAPPA  CULTURE) 


PLATE  XC 


MISCELLANEOUS  OBJECTS:  HARAPPA  AND  JHUKAR  CULTURES 


PLATE  XCII 


i 


SKULL  FROM  CHANHU-DARO:  HARAPPA  CULTURE 


PLATE  XCV 


Fig.  4.  Rig^t  lateral  view  of  skull  as  received 
for  study. 


Fig.  5.  Facial  view. 


Fig.  8.  Occipital  view. 


Fig.  9.  Basilar  view. 


CRANIOGRAPHIC  DRAWINGS  OF  GHANHU-DARO  SKULL 


PLATE  XGVI 


Scale  1:2 


A. 


Central  Archaeological  Library, 

NEW  DELHb^  ^ 

c|l 3 0!>'U  71  /Mc^ 


Call  No 


Avitho 


r 

Title—  . 

**A  book  that  is  shut  is  but  a block” 

^ GOVT.  OF  INDIA 

^ Department  of  Archaeology 

< NEW  DELHI. 

^ Vd 

o 


Please  help  us  to  keep  the  book 
clean  and  moving. 


S.B.,  1 48.  M.  DELHI. 


