Excavations at Dholavira 1989-2005 (RS Bisht, 2015) Full text
including scores of Indus inscriptions announced for the first
time. Report validates Indus script cipher as layered rebus-
metonymy.
The Excavation Report embedded herein is a remarkable announcement of Dholavira as a
significant site of lapidary- and metal-work next only to Chanhu-daro which was proclaimed as
'Sheffield of the East' in an Illustrated London News pictorial essay based on Ernest Mackay's
excavation reports.

Excerpted herein are images of exquisite metalwork artifacts presented together with about 150
inscriptions which use the Indus script cipher (rebus-metonymy layered renderings of
Meluhha/Mleccha language of ancient Indian sprachbund). The artifactual evidence matches
with the rebus readings of inscriptions which have been presented in a trilogy.

               Kalyanaraman, S. 2010. Indus Script Cipher-Hieroglyphs of Indian Linguistic Area.Herndon:
               Sarasvati Research Center.
               Kalyanaraman, S. 2014. Indus Script: Meluhha Metalwork Hieroglyphs. Herndon, VA:
               Sarasvati Research Center.
               Kalyanaraman, S. 2014. Philosophy of Symbolic Forms in Meluhha Cipher. Herndon:
               Sarasvati Research Center.


The Signboard which adorned the Northern Gateway of the citadel of Dholavira was an
announcement of the metalwork repertoire of dhokra kamar, cire perdue metalcasters and other
smiths working with metal alloys. The entire Indus Script Corpora are veritable metalwork
catalogs. The phrase dhokra kamar is rendered on a tablet discovered at Dholavira presented in
this monograph (earlier discussed at http://bharatkalyan97.blogspot.in/2014/01/meluhha-
hieroglyphs-1-dhokra-lost-wax.html ). The 10-hieroglyph inscription of Dholavira Signboard has
been read rebus and presented at http://bharatkalyan97.blogspot.in/2013/08/dholavira-gateway-
to-meluhha-gateway-to.html

These readings are reinforced by the following examples of inscriptions reported in the just-
released Dholavira Excavation Report.




                                                  1
                                          117 antelope; sun motif




                                        40 Three-headed animal, plant; sun motif

Hieroglyph: arka 'sun' Rebus: eraka 'moltencast copper'
Hieroglyph: mlekh 'goat' Rebus: milakkhu 'copper' mleccha 'copper'
Hieroglyph: kolmo 'sprout' Rebus: kolami 'smithy, forge'

Report validates Indus script cipher as layered rebus-metonymy.

https://www.scribd.com/doc/262316120/Excavations-at-Dholavifra-1989-2005-RS-Bisht-
2015 (940 pages) Full text of ASI Report




                                               2
Fig. 6.49: South (Rock-cut) Reservoir 3, Dholavira. "The Harappans during their heyday created
within the city walls in all sixteen or more reservoirs of varying sizes and arranged them, along
the northern and western and largely along the southern sides of the main settlement and the east
of the citadel...The span of the reseervoir at the top of the ancient working level measures 15 m
while the vertical cut of the northern terrace through the rock is 65 m."(p. 148, p.164)




                                                3
4
Fig. 8.320 Details of stone masony blocks used in South Reservoir




                               5
Fig. 2.12 Geological and mineral map of Gujarat and Rajasthan




                             6
Fig. 1.2 Map showing the distribution of mature Harappan sites




                              7
"...the texts talk of Meluhha as a land of precious metals, timber and exotic animals, and Enki
professes, 'Black mountain, ma your trees be great trees, may your forests be forests of highland
mesu trees! Chairs made from them will grace royal palaces! May your reeds be great reeds...!
Heroes shall...them on the battlefield as weapons! May your bulls be great bulls, may they be
bulls of mountains!...May your birds all be peacock! May their cries grace royal palaces! May all
your silver be gold! May all your copper be tin-bronze!"(p.693)

"...cultural territories of the Indus, the SE Irano-Oman and the western Gulf conjure up a vibrant
picture of maritime international trade that respectively involved the ancient worlds of Meluhha,
Magan and Dilmun in connection with mighty Mesopotamia which alone provided a plethora of
wealth of textual and archaeological materials for the later half of the third millennium BCE. The
trade also spilled over into the first two centuries of the second millennium BCE when the
contacts with Harappania waned and then ceased, but the Bactria-Margiana arcaheological
complex of Central Asia was gaining strength as it belatedly witnessed a spurt of urbanization
with some bright flashes, however sans literacy that marked the Harappan and Mesopotamian
civilizations."(p.722)




                                                8
Fig. 10.1 Map showing intercultural interactions sphere during third/early 2nd millennium BCE




                                             9
Fig. 8.319 Details of a chlorite vessel, Dholavira "Two fragments of the chlorite vessels of the
intercultural style have been found from Dholavira. These chlorite vessels are found in a wide
area spreadin across Mesopotamia, Elam, Central Asia and Indus Civilization. Both these vessels
belong to Stage VI, one each from Middle Town and Castle...Each face of the vessedl has a
decoration of circle with a dot inside a rectangular field." (p.601)

Metalwork repertoire of Dholavira

"For the greater Indus regions, the evidence from Mehrgarh and other early sites demonstrates
that the metallurgical innovations of the Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods set the technological
background for the metallurgical traditions of the Harappan stages...Among all these objects, few
items like chisel, arrowhead, rod etc. irrespective of their sizes have been encountered in plenty
number, whereas the remaining ones are low to medium in strength. Selected pieces have been
chosen as a representative type and most of them require adequate chemical treatment for better
understanding of their functional as well as behavioural aspects. The assemblage shows that they
are very typical and has their parallels in Harappa, Mohenjodaro, Chanhudaro, Kalibangan,
Lothal, Rangpur, etc." (pp.514-516)

Excerpts from Section 8.1.1 (pp. 228-231)

"One of the most prominent discoveries from the excavations at Dholavira is the find of a 10
large sized sign board presently lying in the western chamber of North Gate. This inscription was
found lying in the western chamber of north gate, and the nature of find indicates that it could
have been fitted on a wooden signboard, most probably fitted above the lintel of the central
passageway of the gate.

                                               10
Fig. 8.2: Location of ten large sized inscription in North Gate




               Fig. 8.3: Close-up of inscription




   Fig. 8.4: Drawing showing the ten letters of inscription




                              11
Fig. 8.5: Photograph showing the details of inscription in situ.




Fig. 8.6: Close-up of some of the letters from the inscription



                              12
                         Fig. 8.7: Gypsum inlays used for the inscription

"The central passageway of north gate itself measures 3.5 m in width and the length of the
inscription along with the wooden frame impression is also more or less same thereby indicating
the probable location. The inscription consists of 10 large-sized letters of the typical Harappan
script, and is actually gypsum inlays cut into various sizes and shapes, which were utilized to
create each size as, indicated above. The exact meaning of the inscription is not known in the
absence of decipherment of the script.

Section 8.2.3 of the Report (pp. 260-307) details of 225 individual seals discovere at Dholavira,
most of them with photographs. Some broken seals do not have photographs.




                                                13
Fig. 8.23: Pie-chart showing percentages of various motifs on 136 seals.




An 'incised' terracotta cake classified as 'graffiti' on Fig. 8.10, attesting to literate Harappans (See
8.1.3 on p. 231)




                                                  14
                 Fig. 8.8: Inscription on a stone block from Bailey, Dholavira.




Fig. 8.9: Drawing of the inscription found on a stone block, Bailey. The extant length of the
inscription is 16.5 cm while the width is 8 cm. Has 4 signs.This was found in 'one of the four
square underground chambers found at the southern portion of the Bailey. This could be part of
what a rectangular limestone slab, originally a lintel of a doorway.




                                              15
Fig. 7.46: Storage jar from Stage V, Dholavira




                                                          1




                                                      2




                                                 16
         4




         5




     6




17
             8 Approx. a third of the seal. Lower head of a bull on
left and three legs and tail of a tiger.




                                    9




                                     10




                                        11




                 18
                12




                13




                15




     18 Damaged 7-dots-circles.

19
       25. One sign




     21 Buffalo? Six signs.




                30




20
29 Y-shaped sign in place of standard device




                    28




                  27




21
     31




      32




      33




22
                                                                  34




                                                                    36




                                       37 A piece of a large object with two finished faces. One
face has nicely cut four signs; down below, engraving of a wheel attached with a horizontal bar
      with an oval sign cut just above the bar; second side also bears traces of inscription.


                                              23
            38 Manger on the left, below the head of a unicorn
vaguely visibled. No inscription.




                39 Less than half showing only scorpion.




              40 Three-headed animal, plant; a sun motif




               24
                     41 Tjree sogms




42 Two-horned, humpless bull (bos taurus) with a trough
in front. One sign




                           43




       25
                  45




           46 Three signs




     47 Rhinoceros. Trough.




             48 Two signs


26
     49 Elephant




      50 Two signs




       53 Two signs.




27
                                                                55 Three signs




                                          56 A horned person standing between two branches of a
tree, each with three leaves on outer side and one at the top; a devotee kneels, hands touching the
  ground; R lower side, a goat with outstretched wavy horns, upturned tail. Vertical perforation.




                                         57 Tiny seal. Animal looks backward. No inscription.
                                 Vaulted knobs with perforation.




                                                28
          58




           62




     61




29
     60




          59




           65




30
     67




     64




31
     63




      68




      69




     70




32
          71




          72




     73


33
     80




     79




     81




34
      82




     83




     84




35
          86




          87




          88




     89


36
     91




     92




     94




37
           95




     97




          98




38
     99

39
              100




              102




              103




     108 One sign. Elephant


40
           107




           106




     104 Elephant




41
     112




     111




42
     110




      109




      117

43
     114




           113




           118




44
     119




     120




     121



45
     122




      124




       125




46
                 127




     129 fRAGMENTED. tINY SEAL.




                 130




                133




47
     134




     140




     139




     140




48
       142




     144




      143




49
     145




     146




50
              147 All white steatite.




                       149




                        148




     150 Vertical perforation in thickness.


51
                         153




                      154 Tiger




                         157




    159 Black steatite seal. 3 signs. No knob, no
perforation.




    52
                          164 4 signs. Horizontal perforation.




              170. Very tiny seal. Inscription: 3 strokes. Hieroglyph:
kolom 'three' Rebus: kolami 'smithy, forge'.




                   172 Buffalo. Grey white steatite. No inscription.




                    53
                       173




  174 Tiny black steatite unfinished seal. 2 signs.
Unicorn.




                        175




   54
                                         Only round steatite seal found at Dholavira 4 signs.




                                            177 Brahmani bull. Single sign circumfixed in fourt
short strokes. Hieroglyph: ranku 'liquid measure' Rebus: ranku 'tin' Hieroglyph: gaNDa 'four'
                Rebus: kaNDa 'fire altar'. pola 'zebu' Rebus: pola 'magnetite'.




                                             55
                                                           178 3 dihnd.




                                      179 Animal appears to be a 2-horned unicorn. A deep
(high) U shaped vessel (RIM OF JAR) under the head. Inscription: 1 double-rake symbol. Tiny
                                          seal.




                                            56
                                                184 Round Copper seal. X divides 4 parts, each part
  with 3 triangles. Difficult to say if it had something for suspension. Could have been used for
                    printing? (See Rick Willis report on unprovenienced copper
seals) https://www.academia.edu/8886084/Copper_plates_of_Indus_Script_and_rebus_Meluhha
  _readings Mirror: http://bharatkalyan97.blogspot.com/2014/10/copper-plates-of-indus-script-
                                             and-rebus.html




                                                     186 Pipal leaf spread on withers. 3 signs




                                   187 Only R upper corner of a square seal? An oblique stroke
                      below inscription looks like horn of unicorn. 3 signs




                                                57
                      289 Lower body chipped off




                             190 4 signs




    193 2 signs.Central part with perforation through thickness.




194 4 signs.Animal standing to L, only upper body part, tail and
       faintly one leg visible

                 58
                                                                 195




                                                                 196




                                                               206




                                                               208

Goat with forwardly curved horns wrinkled neck and upturned tail; a triangle on a vertical stroke
placed under head. Inscription a pipal leaf in R upper part. Most significant as the perforation is
fitted with a copper ring. (Not illustrated) No. 215

                                                59
     217




      221




      220




       219




      225


60
     223




     224




61
62
Fig. 8.28, 8.29, 8.30 Sealings, Dholavira




                                            63
Fig. 8.31, 8.32: Details on the flat & curved surfaces of the terracotta tablet. Acc. No. 8099




Fig. 8.115: A cache of beads of various raw materials




                                                 64
Fig. 8.135 A bead making workshop near West Gate, Castle, Dholavira




                                            65
Fig. 8.201 Map showing raw material sources




                                              66
67
Fig. 8.202, 8.203 Copper tools, Dholavira




                                            68
Fig. 8.205 Copper crucible, Dholavira




                                        69
Fig. 8.206 Copper tools (arrowheads, chisel, razor etc.)




Fig. 8.207 Copper animal figurine, Dholavira.


                                                70
Fig. 8.208: Copper cooking pan, Dholavira




Fig. 8.210 Copper bangles, Dholavira




Fig. 8.209 Copper mirror, Dholavira




                                            71
Fig. 8.212, 8.213 Copper spearheads, Dholavira




                                             72
Fig. 8.214 Copper razor, Dholavira.




                73
Fig. 8.220 Copper spearhead with holes for hafting, Dholavira




                             74
8.219 Copper spearhead, in situ. Dholavirfa




   Fig. 8.222 Copper chisels, Dholavira




        Fig. 8.221 Copper hammer




                    75
Fig. 8.224 Copper tools, Dholavira




                                     76
Fig. 8.223 Copper tools, Dholavira




               77
      Fig. 8.225 Copper spearhead




Fig. 8.226: Copper ornaments, Dholavira.




                  78
Fig. 8.230: Copper spearhead, fish-hooks, razor, Dholavira. 1 &3 Spearhead; 2 Razor; 4. Double-
sided razo; 5-6 arrowhead; 7 knife.




                                              79
Fig. 8.236 Silver objects, Dholavira




                                       80
Fig. 8.252 Wheels, both with hub and spokes. Terracotta. Dholavira.




                                              81
Fig. 10.2: Etched carnelian and agate beads from Harappan sites.




                              82
Fig. 10.3: Long carnelian beads of Harappan workmanship




                          83
Fig. 10.4: Strings of long carnelian and lapis-lazuli beads from the Mari treasure




                                       84
 Fig. 10.6: Spiral ornaments of copper from late phase of Harappan culture (late 3rd/early 2nd
millennium BCE): A. Dholaira (Kachchh), B and C Pithad (Saurashtra) B&C by Courtesy: Dept.
                          of Archaeology, MS University, Vadodara




                                             85
Fig. 10.7: Disc beads of gold and silver with tubular hole from Lothal




                                 86
Fig. 10.8: Trefoil design on the cloak of the statuette from Mohenjo-daro




                                   87
Fig. 10.9: Harappan tablet showing a hero fighting




                       88
Fig. 10.12 B: Depiction of boat/ship from Mohenjo-daro on a seal




                              89
Fig. 10.13: Three views of Persian Gulf seal from Lothal




       Fig. 10.14: Omani-like seals from Lothal.




                          90
Fig. 10.15: Copper ingot from Lothal




                91
Fig. 10.16: Steatite vessels from late levels of Harappa culture (late 3rd/early 2nd millennium
                         BCE) A: Mohenjo-daro; B and C: Dholavira.




                                              92
Fig. 10.17: Round seals of Gulf type with Indus motifs and inscriptions.




                                  93
Fig. 10.20: A. Harappan-like spear-head from surface at Suwayy SWY-3; B. Copper fish-hooks
from Ra's al-Jinz, out of 100s of examples from the site. Harappan fishhooks are also the same
                                (both after Joint Hadd Project).




                                             94
Fig. 10.21: Harappan ware pottery, A. Jar and dish-on-stand fragments from Hili 8, periods IIc-
  IId (c. 2500-2400 BCE)(After Philippe Gouin); B. Part of S-shaped jar from Ra's al-Jinz (c.
2500-2400 BCE)(After Helene David); C. Top one, a red ware sherd bearing Harappan writing
from the surface at RJ-2 at Ra's al-Jinz; lower one, an inscribed black slipped jar (24th century
BCE) from Ra's al-Jinz; D. An inscribed rim sherd from an Indian site (B-D after Cleuziou et al
                                          2007: fig.176)




                                               95
Fig. 10.22: Indus black slipped jar




                96
Fig. 10.23: Omani-type steatite stamp seals from Ra's al-Jinz: A&B from building VII, datable to
  c. 2200 BCED; C. from grave 1, Ra's al-Jinz, dated to before 2400 BCE (all after Joint Hadd
                                             Project).




                                              97
Fig. 10.24: A. Copper tools from Al-Moyassar: such tools are found in the Harappan assemblage
  (after German Mining Museum at Bochum); B. Barring the first, the rest may be seen in the
Harappan assemblage, the first is, however, close to the one from post-Harappan Copper Hoard
                                   tools (after Benton 1996).




                                             98
             Figure 10.25: An ivory comb from Ra's al-Jinz (c. 2400 BCE)




Figure 11.1: Composite image of 176 seals in Dholavira section, Purana Qila, New Delhi




                                         99
Figure 11.2: Composite image of stone weights in Dholavira section, Purana Qila, New Delhi




                                           100
Figure 11.3: A selection of microcrystalline silicate (agate and jasper) beads




                   Steatite artifacts of Dholavira sampled




                                     101
Figure 11.29: Provisional steatite acquisition routes for the site Dholavira




                                    102
Figure 11.31: Provisional agate acquisition networks for Dholavira




                               103
          Figure 11.33: Provisional tan-gray chert acquisition networks for Dholavira




                  Figure 11.37: Harappan lead and silver acquisition networks




                                   Copper alloy. 12% tin-bronze.
http://asi.nic.in/pdf_data/dholavira_excavation_report_new.pdf Dholavira ASI. Excavations at
Dholavifra 1989-2005 (RS Bisht, 2015)

 Excavations - Dholavira - Gallery




                                             104
Excavations - Dholavira
                          Dholavira




                             105
Being one among the five largest Harappan cities in the subcontinent, Dholavira has yielded
many firsts in respect of Indus civilization. Fourteen field seasons of excavation through an
enormous deposit caused by the successive settlements at the site for over 1500 years during all
through the 3rd millennium and unto the middle of the 2nd millennium BC have revealed seven
significant cultural stages documenting the rise and fall of the Indus civilization in addition to
bringing to light a major, a model city which is remarkable for its exquisite planning,
monumental structures, aesthetic architecture, amazing water harvesting system and a variety in
funerary architecture. It also enjoys the unique distinction of yielding an inscription made up of
ten large-sized signs of the Indus script and, not less in importance, is the other find of a
fragment of a large slab engraved with three large signs. This paper attempts to give an account
of hydro-engineering that is manifest in the structures of the Harappans at Dholavira.

The ancient site at Dholavira (230 53' 10" N; 700 13'E), taluka Bhachau, district Kachchh in state
Gujarat, lies in the island of Khadir which, it turn, is surrounded by the salt waste of the Great
Rann of Kachchh. The ancient settlement is embraced by two monsoon channels, namely, the
Manhar and Mansar. The ruins, including the cemetery covers an area of about 100 hectares half
of which is appropriated by the articulately fortified settlement of the Harappans alone.

The salient components of the full-grown cityscape consisted of a bipartite 'citadel', a 'middle
town' and a 'lower town', two 'stadia', an 'annexe', a series of reservoirs all set within an
enormous fortification running on all four sides. Interestingly, inside the city, too, there was an
intricate system of fortifications. The city was, perhaps, configured like a large parallelogram
boldly outlined by massive walls with their longer axis being from the east to west. On the bases
of their relative location, planning, defences and architecture, the three principal divisions are
designed tentatively as 'citadel', 'middle town', and 'lower town'.



                                                106
The citadel at Dholavira, unlike its counterparts at Mohenjodaro, Harappa and Kalibangan but
like that at Banawali, was laid out in the south of the city area. Like Kalibangan and Surkotada it
had two conjoined subdivisions, tentatively christened at Dholavira as 'castle' and 'bailey',
located on the east and west respectively, both are fortified ones. The former is the most
zealously guarded by impregnable defences and aesthetically furnished with impressive gates,
towers, salients and drainage. To the north of the citadel a broad and long ground, probably used
for multiple purposes such as community gathering on festive or ceremonial occasions, a stadium
and a marketing place for exchanging merchandise during trading seasons (s). Further north,
there was laid out the enwalled middle town while to its east was founded the lower town. The
last -mentioned one did not have an appurtenant fortification though, it was set within the general
circumvallation.

Besides to the south of the castle, across the adjoining reservoir, there was raised another built-
up area running along the city wall, perhaps, designated as annexe or a warehouse meant for
housing the retainers and menials.

The layout that is briefly described above pertained to the fully-developed form of the Harappan
city. There are identified seven major cultural stages, serially numbered from Stage I to Stage
VII which document the gradual rise, culmination and fall of the Urban System of the Harappan
civilization vis-s-vis the settlement which spread over a time period of one and a half
millenniums spanning the whole of the 3rd millennium and half of the following.

The first settlement of Stage I was a strong fortress now lying buried in the castle mound. A part
of the southern arm of its fortification that was laid bare near the south-western corner measured
11.10 m at the base. It showed tapering sides to an extant height 4 m. The foundation of the


                                                107
planning that was laid in Stage I formed the nucleus on which the subsequent settlements of the
later stages expanded gradually. Even the building materials, whether standardized bricks (9 x 8
x 36 cm, ratio 1 : 2 : 4 ) or stone, both undressed and dressed, remained in use, subsequently
through Stage V.

In Stage II, a 2.80 m thick brick masonry wall was added to the pre-existing defensive wall from
the inner side and the face of it was plastered over with fine paste of white and pink clays at least
as many as thirteen times. There is another significant development that took place. A residential
area was coming up to the north of the walled settlement. Besides, pottery forms and antiquities
diversified as well as increased in both quality and quantity.

Stage III, sub-divided into two phases, i.e. IIIA and IIIB, was a most creative and important one
in many respects: the southern arm of the antecedent fort-wall was further widened from the
inner side with an additional brick-masonry of about 4.5 m and the existing walled settlements
was made into a castle and another walled subdivision, arbitrarily called as bailey, was added to
it from the west. In the north, the extended residential area of Stage II was cleared of structures
for carving out a multipurpose ground. Further north, the extensive walled town (which would
become middle town subsequently) was founded. Reservoirs were created on the south, west and
north of the built-up divisions on an ostentatious scale and design. And, finally, an outer
fortification in order to surround all the components was constructed during this stage. For the
first time, three square steatite seals much smaller and lighter and furnished with figures but
without inscriptions appeared in addition to a potsherd bearing Indus signs and also a cubical
weight. Besides, a good number of classical Harappan pottery forms with painted motifs made
their debut.

When the town of Stage III had lived two-thirds of its life, it was immensely damaged by a
catastrophe. Its tell-tale marks were vividly present in the defensive wall of the castle. Repairs
were undertaken, the lower town was added and the city-walls were extended further eastwards
in order to enclose the new additions. As a result, the erstwhile town attained full cityscape that
dominated the cultural scenario for centuries through Stages IV and V.

Significantly, during the first three stages, i.e., I, II and III, the inhabitants exhibited an abiding
preference for colourful clays, e.g., white and pink for plastering nearly all the structures whether
defensive walls, roads, streets, ceremonial ground, or the walls and floors of private houses.
Even roof tops of the houses might have been treated similarly. But, this tradition came to an
abrupt end with the end of Stage IIIB and beginning of Stage IV, as if under a royal decree or by
a resolute public consensus. At Stage IIIB, the cityscape had attained its fullest growth.

Stage IV belonged to that form of the classical Harappan culture which is so widely familiar with
from a large number of excavated sites. Almost all the salient features of the city planning were
scrupulously maintained along with the monumental structures such as gateways, fortification,
drainage system. The famous ten-signed inscription of unusually large size was surely in use
during this stage. All the classical Harappan elements such as pottery, seals, weights, beads,
items of gold, silver, copper, ivory, shell, faience, steatite, clay and stones are found in
abundance.


                                                 108
Stage V is characterized by the general decline particularly in the maintenance of the city. It is
more vividly reflected in the citadel. The other items such as pottery, seals, weights, etc.,
continued in use, however.

This stage was followed by a temporary desertion of the site, perhaps not lasting more than a few
decades before the Stage VI ushered in.

Stage VI presents a state of cultural transformation. New ceramic traditions coming from the
sides of Sind, Rajasthan, Gujarat and far-off region in the north made appearance. The one-time
city shrank into a smaller town, confined to the citadel and the southern margin of the middle
town only although some of the existing fortification walls were kept in use, a new wall of
different construction was raised on the north for delimiting the settlement. The classical
planning was largely given a go-by. Domestic buildings were laid out in a different planning.
Bricks were no longer in use. While many of the pottery forms and decorative motifs were still in
vogue, new ceramics in the form of white painted black-and-red and white painted grey wares
along with a coarse ware bearing incised or appliqué or both kinds of designs and also some Bara
related pottery made their appearance. Many other traditional items continued in use though the
seals underwent a change. Rather being square in form, those were long rectangular with a flat or
triangular back with a hole for string. The seals still bore nicely cut inscriptions but no figures.
Stone cubical weights were still in vogue in addition to similar ones cut out of potsherds. Overall
picture that is projected is that impoverishment and rapidly crumbling urbanism. Having lived
there for about a century, the late Harappans of Stage VI abandoned the settlement.

The desertion that followed was certainly a longer one. How long? It is not certain at present.
The new comers of Stage VII had forgotten the classical Harappan fabrics, shapes and designs.
Strangely enough, the newcomers built their houses in an entirely new form that was circular. No
planning as such is discernible. All the urban attributes became conspicuous by their absence.

Thus the urbanization that made its humble beginnings in stage I and went on progressing
through Stages II, III and IV, started decaying in Stage V and underwent a transformation in
Stage VI with a feeble revival only to become totally deurbanised in Stage VII. The site was
never occupied thereafter.




                                                109
Lying between the monsoon channels and being undulating sloping towards the south, the site
was ideally suited for a settlement having artificial dams and reservoirs.

The city of Dholavira in its fullest form was a precisely proportionate whole and proportionality
resolved configuration following a resolute set of principles of planning and architecture with
mathematical precision and, perhaps, with astronomically established orientation. Of the city, at
present, three corners with partially eroded towers but fully intact inner corners have been
confirmed by excavation. When measured between the inner corners, the E- W length of the city
area along the northern defensive wall and N-S one along the western one worked out to 771.10
m and 616.87 m, respectively - thus giving the precise ratio of 5 : 4. Similarly, the other divisions
of the city also revealed amazing ratios and proportions. The following table provides revealing
information:
  Sl. No.     Division                                        Width          Length       Ratio
 1           City, internal                                  616.87         711.10        4:5
 2           Castle, internal at available top               92             114           4:5
 3           Castle, external (as per present exposure)      118            151           4:5

                                                110
4          Citadel (castle + bailey), external              140            280           1:2
           approximately (including bastions)
5          Bailey, internal                                 120            120           1:1
6          Middle Town + Stadium, internal                  290.45         340.5         6:7
7          Middle Town, excluding Stadium, internal         242            340.5         5:7
8          Stadium, internal                                47.5           283           1:6
9          Lower Town, built-up area                        300            300           1:1

The above table inter alia reveals the proportional relationship between the castle and the city so
it does in respect of intra-divisional and inter-divisional measurements. It is interesting to give
another illustration: the diagonal drawn between the two opposite angles made by the north-
eastern and the south-western corners of the city touched the north-western corner of the castle.
While of the remaining two, the south-eastern corner is still missing, or not found out, a line,
therefore bisecting the north-western angle also bisected the north-western corner of the middle
town and further on cut across a crossing of four streets and finally the north-eastern corner of
the castle. This could have been achieved by precise mathematical calculations and drawings
which were then translated on the ground that was undulating by 13 m in gradient. It was indeed
a great engineering achievement. In the whole scheme, the enwalled area of the castle became
49th (7 X 7) part of the city while its total built-up area was 25th (5 X 5) part.

Furthermore, it is very significant that the two-thirds of the middle town and the whole of lower
town were planned with bold projections and recesses just like those one finds in the layout of an
Indian temple of the later ages. As a result, the city divisions were provided with a number of
housing sectors and spaces. Some of latter were found to have been used for dumping domestic
refuse. Another significant feature is the arterial street that ran across axially from west to east
dividing all the above-mentioned units and sub-units into two equal halves, and a north-south
street, perhaps somewhat staggered, further subdivided each unit.

The lower town, too, was resolved into several units. Each unit seems to be having likewise
projections and recesses and in turn demarcating an opens pace, of course. The arterial street of
the middle town passed through a gate in eastern fortification wall and then went on running
across the lower town albeit with a few turns, each at the end of a residential sector. The street
however remained uninterrupted. Other major and minor streets and lanes shot off from the axial
street for making a defined network of housing sectors.

Seventeen gates, all built in the fortification walls with equally interesting add-on components,
have been exposed so far. Their number-wise break up is: cattle 5, bailey 2, stadiums 4, middle
town 1, annexe 2 and the remaining 3 belonging to the late Harappans of Stage VI.

Being fairly much preserved, those bear immense archaeological and architectural significance
interestingly, each castle gate is designed differently. Four of them, constructed somewhat, if not
precisely, in the centre of each arm of the fortification, were regular gates while the fifth as an
additional one in the eastern wall served some specific purpose as the flight of its broad steps
stopped just halfway down from the top and did not descend onto the ground outside. The south


                                                111
gate was a concealed passageway leading one through open stairs to an exquisite rock cut
reservoir. The remaining three, one each on east, west and north, shared a few common features
which comprised besides broad and deep passageway and stairs, a high front terrace and a
connected pathway with outward gentle slope. All these were duly provided with in the west
gate. There the similarity ended. The east gate was more elaborate with a built-in chamber, large
and elevated above the sunken passageway which in turn was connected to stairs rising onto the
interior of the castle.

The north gate was however the most elaborate and the most elegant and imposing on a vantage
location commanding over sprawling cityscape and enchanting landscape. It had two large and
elevated chambers flanking the sunken passageway which in turn was connected to an L-shaped
staircase ascending from the inner end. Its lofty front terrace, 6m high and 12m deep, was
connected to an equally broad pathway with a slope towards the east where it terminated
separately onto the little as well as great stadium. The north gate is also remarkable for yielding a
spectacularly large inscription made up of 10 unusually big Harappan letters which were surely
inlaid on a wooden board since decayed but fairly determinable for its size and shape which
matched well with the width of the doorsill of the gate and suggesting thereby that it was
originally sported on the façade, right above the door of the gate so as to be visible from afar for
its white brilliance.

Of very special should also be the pillars and the pilasters which adorned the interior of the
chambers of both east and west gates. Those were mounted on the side walls of chambers for
giving support to the respective roofs as well. Each wall had a central pillar and a pilaster at
either end, mow represented by their lower members as those were composite ones. These
members were skillfully sculpted and smoothened out of bright yellow or banded limestone that
was quarried 2.5 km. from the side. Each pilaster has a long basal slab supporting a set of
rectangular blocks on what rested the superstructure made of mud concrete bricks, which was
most likely encased with three wooden planks with their tongues being close fit into grooves that
were cut on each top block while the third plank, was, perhaps, fixed into the other two by side
angle joints. Likewise the central pillar, too, has a basal slab supporting a set of square blocks
followed by a beautifully carved circular member with concave profile and flattened bottom and
top surface. While all those were in situ, there were also found two dislodged ones, both having
convex profile as well as tenon hole provision on either flat surface of each. Plausibly, the shaft
of the column was wooden one. Contrarily, the central pillar of the western chamber of the north
gate was found missing to be represented now by a robber's pit. The corresponding one is the
other chamber also suffered from vandalism that was certainly wrought by the late Harappans.
Luckily, all its members, which were met with the east gate, were found there although lying
topsy-turvy in the pit that was caused right under the precise location of the pillar.

In all, certainly in the north gate, there was a door with double leaves within a massive frame
with a sill of limestone at either end of the deep passageway. At each end, there were, perhaps,
two doors, one above another as this gate seems to be a double-storied construction with a
possibility of a continuous wooden floor running wall-to-wall all over across the chambers and
above the sunken passage so as to make a large magestic hall decorated with aesthetic pillars and
pilasters and approachable from the rear side, besides the staircase.


                                                112
We may not be elaborating on the other gates in the city. However, the east gate of the great
stadium and the similarly located gate of the middle town, both intercommunicating with the
lower town, were also quite elaborate and impressive. Significantly, the west gate of the same
stadium was connected with a long and broad corridor with a storm water drain running
underneath. The late Harappans gate openings were simple and unpretentious. They were also
however using many a Harappan gates.

Very likely, the north gate and also the east gate inter alia served the purpose of royal procession
on occasions and the little stadium had a role in that too.
Mohenjodaro and Kalibangan have open space between citadel and lower town. At Harappa and
Rakhigarhi, it lies to the east of citadel and north of lower town. Archaeologically speaking, no
convincing proof of use(s) of such space has been put forward so far. Now, Dholavira can claim
a solution to the riddle. It has shown up two such open grounds which should have been put to
multipurpose uses such as community gathering on festive or special occasions, royal
ceremonies, sports and entertainment and commercial activities during trading season.
Propositions are based on their location, architectural specialties and antiquarian tidbits that were
found in course of excavation. There are two such closed arenas. One, lying between citadel and
middle town and being provided with two major gates, one on each on east and west, measured
283 m E-W and 45 to 47m N.S (ratio 6:1). It was also furnished with tiered, stepped or sloping
stands on all four sides. For convenience, we may refer it as stadium or rather the great stadiums
while the other one, far smaller is called the little stadium. The latter that was separated by
massive stand from, but connected through an opening to, the former, lay right under the shadow
of the pre-eminent castle onto which it abutted at the north-western corner. Both the stadia
should have been used for some common as well as some separate function. To conclude, we
may add that the great stadium is perhaps the largest in length while both are the earliest so far as
archaeology has evidenced.

The other area in which the Harappans of Dholavira excelled spectacularly pertained to water
harvesting with the aid of dams, drain, reservoirs and storm water management which eloquently
speak of tremendous engineering skill of the builders. Equally important is the fact that all those
features were integrated part of city planning and were surely the beauty aids, too, The
Harappans created about sixteen or more reservoir of varying sizes and designs and arranged
them in a series practically on all four sides. A cursory estimate indicates that the water
structures and relevant and related activities accounts for 10 hectares of area, in other words 10%
of the total area that the city appropriated within its outer fortification. The 13 m of gradient
between high and low areas from east to west within the walls was ideally suited for creating
cascading reservoirs which were separated from each other by enormous and broad bunds and
yet connected through feeding drains.

Six of the water tanks, one to east of castle and five of the series to south of it, have been fully or
considerably exposed while a few others or other related features are testified in check digs. It
was found to be the largest, grandest and best-furnished reservoir of rectangular shape measuring
73.40 m N-S and 29.30 m E-W (ratio 5:2) at the top while above that there should have been a 1
to 1.20 m high embankment as evidenced at four corners. Its floor was excavated into three
levels the deepest of which was 10.60 m as has been ascertained so far. At three corners, the
north-western, north-eastern and south-western, it was provided with a flight of 30 steps each

                                                 113
while at the fourth, there should be a waste-weir that still remains to be determined by more
excavation. While the embankment served as a broad walkway on two sides, it was found to be a
part of a wide causeway connecting it to the entrance appurtenances of the castle and, on the
west, it should be flush with a 20 to 22 m promenade that lay between the castle wall and the
reservoir. Inside the water structure there was found a rock cut well with a few rock cut steps and
a stone-made enclosure of a later date. It is well-nigh presumable that some kind of tank was
there right from Stage I. It should have been elaborated during Stage III. The present one was
certainly a creation of Stage IV while during Stage V, it got damaged beyond repairs by the
authorities – that, it become defunct forever. One thing is certain that it was accessible to all the
city-dwellers whether living in citadel, middle town or lower town or even outsiders. Besides, it
was, perhaps, by all on some social or religious occasions. It may also be added that it was
created by partly excavated through the alluvium and partly by cutting the underlying rock and
also that it was fed with the water from the Manhar largely.

Another five making a series outside along the south of the citadel have excavated fully or partly.
These are of varying sizes and depth were cut into soft sedimentary sandy limestone and make
two mega-units with a somewhat staggered disposition. The first two from the east form one unit
and the rest the second centrally located tank exhibit genuinely a rock cut architecture of
excellence both in beauty and skill and also surely in importance and use. Consisting of both
inlying and outlying features, it has a deep basin, an obliquely oriented deeper trough inside, a
surrounding freeboard, two masonry flight of steps, an inlet and another rock cut outlet channel,
besides outside features like a wide terrace on the west, a massive levee on the east, a stairway
ascending to the covered south gate of the castle, a working platform on the south, a passageway
between walls, emanating from the north-eastern stairs. Running parallel to the defensive walls
of the castle as well as the city, it is rectangular tank measuring 33.4 E-W and 8.90 to 9.45 m N-
S while the upper lies at the depth of 5.90 m to 6.50 m and the lower one at 7.90 m below the
ancient working level. In fact, the deeper level pertains to the trough that was cut in the eastern
half of the general basin. It has measured 15.50 m long E-W and 5.65 m acoss with its vertical
sides being 140 oblique to those of the main basin. The neatness with what the tank was cut is
remarkable. The weaker veins of the rock were scooped out and plugged with superb masonry
work. The remaining two rock cut tanks lay further west. All the tanks were interconnected with
drain conducting water into each other. The surplus water finally flowed out through a masonry
drain into another series of reservoirs excavated further west. All these reservoirs like the eastern
one became defunct sometime during Stage V.

The citadel has yielded an intricate network of storm water drains, all connected to an arterial
one and furnished with slopes, steps, cascades, manholes (air ducts / water relief ducts), paved
flooring and capstones. The main drains were high enough for a tall man to walk through easily.
The rainwater collected through these drains was stored in yet another reservoir that was carved
out in the western half of the bailey.

Besides, the city has yielded toilets, sullage jars, or sanitary pits. Drains have shown a good
variety even included cut-stone ones and pottery pipes.
Like many amazing elements that Dholavira has yielded in respect of Indus civilization, another
aspect of sepulchral architecture. The cemetery lies to the west of the city and covers a very large
area. There are found a variety of cenotaphs which include regular rectangular and circular

                                                114
structures. So far as orientation is concerned, besides north – south, or northeast – southwest
oriented structures, there are many which are east – west in longer axis which is certainly not
Harappan in character. The most interesting are seven hemispherical constructions two of which
were subjected to excavations. These were huge mud brick structures, having a circular plan and
hemispherical elevation. While one was designed in the form of a spoked wheel, the other was
without spokes. Both the structures were made over rock-cut chambers of large dimensions.
Primarily, all sepulchral structures are devoid of skeletons although in most cases, they are
furnished with grave goods mainly in the form of pottery. One of the hemispherical structures
which has been exposed much, has yielded a necklace of steatite beads strung in a copper wire
with a hook at either end, a gold bangle, beads in gold foil and other beads, besides specially
made pottery. The hemispherical structures remind one of early Buddhist stupas. The kind of
design that is of spoked wheel and unspoked wheel also remind one of the Sara-rata-chakra-citi
and sapradhi-rata-chakra-citi mentioned in the Śatapatha Brahmana and Sulba-sutras.
However, there is a solitary example of a grave with skeleton, with a copper mirror in it.
Among smaller graves, there are cists, or cist in a cairn circle, or a circle or half-circle containing
number of grave structures. Surely, the Harappans had a composite society having different
ethnic / tribal communities following their own practices.
Dholavira has indeed added new dimensions to personality of Indus civilization and hold
promise of yielding more given to more exposure sometime in the future.

http://asi.nic.in/asi_exca_2007_dholavira.asp
Excavations at Dholavifra 1989-2005 (RS Bisht, 2015)




                                                 115
